BCRD keeps its monetary policy rate at 5.50% per year
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. - At its January 2019 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to render the benchmark unchanged is based on a detailed analysis of the risk balance around inflation forecasts, including information from international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. December's monthly inflation was -0.22%, closing the year at 1.17%. Underlying inflation, which isolates the effects of those volatile components, closed the year at 2.47%. The forecasting system indicates that inflation would gradually converge to the target range of 4.0% to 1.0% over the 24-month policy horizon.

Recently, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) published its Global Economic Outlook (WEO) report and highlighted the slowdown in global economic growth, reducing its 2019 projections from 3.7% to 3.5% and 2020 from 3.9% to 3.6%.

On the other hand, Consensus Forecast predicts that the world economy would grow 2.9% during 2019 and 2.8% by 2020. Global expansion of economic activity would continue to be driven by the United States of America, although a moderation in its growth is expected, reaching 2.5% in 2019 and 1.8% by 2020. Consensus Forecast also maintained its moderate growth forecast in the Euro Zone (ZE), with expansions of 1.5% in 2019 and 1.4% in 2020.

It can be seen from the projections of both the IMF and Consensus Forecast, which is seen as more uncertainty on the international stage, which could have an effect on policy decisions in advanced economies. In that regard, at its last meeting, the US Federal Reserve announced that the next monetary policy normalization would follow a more gradual process this year.

In the case of Latin America, the region is projected to grow 1.9% in 2019 and 2.5% in 2020, driven by the dynamism of economies such as the Dominican Republic, Bolivia, Panama, Paraguay, Chile and Peru. However, economic vulnerabilities and socio-political tensions continue in countries such as Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua, economies that would remain in recession in 2019.
As for raw materials, after a few months of falls, the price of oil has recovered reaching about US$54 per barrel in January. Recent behavior has been influenced by a drop in both OPEC's oil inventories and production, as well as increased uncertainty in financial markets. Also, according to the International Energy Agency, the price of oil would remain around US$55 a barrel, on average, during 2019.

Domestically, economic activity continues to grow above its potential, in a context of low inflationary pressures. Indeed, real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 7.0% during 2018, driven mainly by investment and private consumption. Consistent with economic dynamism, there is an increase in credit to the private sector in national currency by around 11.0% year-on-year in January 2019.

Importantly, the weighted average passive interest rate on multiple banking has increased by about 100 basis points following the July 2018 Monetary Policy Rate increase. This adjustment has made it possible to close the interest rate differential against U.S. rates, helping to avoid risks in macroeconomic stability.

On the fiscal policy side, public spending moderated during 2018, accounting for 5.9% growth in erogations at the end of the year, while revenue expansion reached 12.5% year-on-year, contributing to the process of consolidation of public finances. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as tourism, remittances and exports remain in remarkable dynamism, contributing to the fact that the current account deficit in the balance of payments will close the year at around -1.4% of GDP, despite a higher oil bill. The good performance of the external sector has facilitated the accumulation of international reserves in addition to contributing to the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic remains attentive to the evolution of the U.S. monetary policy normalization, as well as the performance of the dollar in the international market and the price of oil globally, being prepared to react in a timely manner to any factor that may cause inflationary diversions. In this regard, the issuing body reaffirms its commitment to driving monetary policy towards the achievement of its inflation target and the smooth functioning of the financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability.
