At its monetary policy meeting for the month of January 2017, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.50% per annum.

The decision on the benchmark interest rate was adopted after a thorough analysis of the risk balance around inflation projections, as well as the state of the economy based on its main indicators, market expectations and the international environment. relevant. Last December, the year-on-year rate of inflation closed at 1.70%, while core inflation, related to the monetary conditions of the economy, was 1.89%. According to the projections, inflation would converge to the target range of 4% ± 1% in the monetary policy horizon.

In the external context, the growth prospects of the world economy are positive, with an estimated rate of expansion of 2.5% in 2016 and 2.8% in 2017, according to Consensus Forecast. This improvement in world economic activity would be influenced by the United States of America (USA), which according to preliminary figures recorded a growth of 1.6% in 2016, having experienced an expansion of 1.9% year-on-year in the last quarter. For the year 2017, a better performance of this economy is expected when projecting a growth of 2.3% associated with the positive expectation of the fiscal stimulus plan that the new government of that country would implement. The greater dynamism of the US, our main trading partner, should be a positive factor for our economy in 2017.
Regarding the Euro Zone (ZE), it is estimated that the real product would expand 1.6% in 2016 and in 2017 it would reach a growth of 1.4%. Inflation in these industrialized economies has maintained a positive trend, gradually approaching the targets set by its central banks. In the case of Latin America, the region would have closed in 2016 with a contraction of -0.6%, to recover in 2017 with a growth of 1.2%, according to estimates of the International Monetary Fund. On the other hand, the international prices of most primary goods show a growing trend so far this year, especially oil, industrial metals and some foods.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity expanded at a rate of 6.6% in 2016, being the highest in the region for the third consecutive year. In the monetary sector, the dynamism in total financial system credit continues to the private sector, both in domestic and foreign currency, growing by 11.9% at the end of 2016, above the expansion of nominal GDP. Public finances during the second semester of 2016 have strengthened, as there has been an improvement in tax revenues and a moderation in public spending, with a primary surplus expected for the end of the year, which would contribute to strengthening the sustainability of the public debt.
In addition, the strengthening of macroeconomic fundamentals was maintained during 2016, when the lowest current account deficit was recorded in the last decade (-1.5% of GDP), influenced by the dynamism of tourism, remittances and national exports. This good performance of the external sector allowed the Gross International Reserves to close the year at historically high levels of US $ 6,047.4 million, equivalent to a coverage of 3.9 months of imports, which gives the Dominican economy greater strength to react to any event adverse and guarantee the relative stability of the foreign exchange market.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to continue conducting monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target and maintaining macroeconomic stability, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, In order to adopt the necessary measures in the face of risks regarding price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
