At its monetary policy meeting in January 2018, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.25% per annum.

This decision was based on an exhaustive analysis of the balance of risks around inflation forecasts, the evolution of the main national macroeconomic indicators, the international environment, market expectations and medium-term projections. Inflation for the month of December 2017 was 0.97%, while year-on-year inflation stood at 4.20%, close to the central value of the target range of 4.0% ± 1.0% established in the Monetary Program. In turn, core inflation, related to monetary conditions, reached 2.36% year-to-year at the end of 2017. Forecasts indicate that inflation would remain within the target range in the 24-month monetary policy horizon.

In the international arena, the world economy experienced a growth of 3.2% in 2017, while for 2018 Consensus Forecast (CFC) estimates an expansion rate of 3.3% for the global economy. In 2017, the behavior of the world economy was driven by the performance of advanced economies, particularly by growth rates of 2.3% in the United States of America (USA) and 2.5% in the Euro Zone (ZE). By 2018, CFC projects that the dynamism of the advanced economies would continue with an expansion of 2.7% in the US and 2.2% in the ZE. On the price side, US inflation was 2.1% in 2017 and that of the EZ of 1.4%, while it is expected that by 2018 in both economies the price growth would be similar to last year.

The recovery continued in Latin America (AL) during 2017, estimating a growth of 1.8% according to Consensus Forescast. By 2018, it is expected that all countries in the region would maintain a positive economic performance, with the sole exception of Venezuela. In that sense, the growth projections of CFC point to an expansion for the region of 2.6% by the end of 2018. In general terms, large economies of Latin America, exporters of commodities, would benefit from the upward trend that is observed in the international prices of primary goods, while at the same time they would be facing favorable international financial conditions in an environment of abundant liquidity worldwide.
In the domestic context, the economy has reacted favorably to monetary easing measures that were implemented as of August 2017. Since that period, the active interest rate has been significantly reduced and loans to the private sector in national currency have grown in about RD $ 55 billion. The growth of credit reached 12.5% ??year-to-year at the end of January, generating a great dynamism in investment and consumption, which boosted the recovery of domestic demand. Indeed, preliminary information from the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) indicates a growth of 7.4% in the month of December and an accumulated expansion of 4.6% during the year 2017. The outlook for the Dominican economy in 2018 is positive, when projecting a growth of around 5.5% in the Monetary Program, influenced by greater expansion in the US, our main trading partner, and by the dynamism of credit at the domestic level. Macroeconomic models indicate that growth could be even higher at the end of the year, approaching 6.0%.

On the other hand, the external sector continues to record a good performance, closing 2017 with a Current Account deficit of -0.2% of GDP, the lowest in thirteen years. Likewise, the positive result of the global balance of payments allowed an accumulation of international reserves of some US $ 730 million, about 4.4 months of importation. The dynamism of foreign exchange generating activities such as tourism, remittances and foreign investment contributed to this remarkable accumulation of international reserves, while at the same time facilitating the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and to maintain macroeconomic stability, helping to create the conditions for the economy to grow around its potential. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
