The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its Monetary Policy meeting in February 2012, decided to maintain its Monetary Policy Rate unchanged at 6.75% per annum. At the same time, it decided to leave the Lombard Interest Rate unchanged at 9.0% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate is based on the fact that inflation continues to converge to the goal of 5.5% ± 1% for 2012. The behavior of the main macroeconomic variables and the forecast models do not foresee deviations from the inflation target in the policy horizon for this year. In January 2012, inflation was 0.4%, contributing to the year-on-year rate being reduced for the fifth month, registering 6.9% after reaching a maximum of 10.2% in August 2011. This downward trend is also reflected in inflation the year-on-year core which was 4.8% at the end of the month.

In the external context, the outlook for moderate growth in the world economy remains, so that, in the absence of disruptions, a reduction in global inflationary pressures is expected. Recent indicators of economic activity and employment show that the United States would continue to recover gradually, while Europe and Japan would face recessionary conditions during 2012. Emerging economies maintain a positive outlook, although more moderate than last year.
The recent agreement between the IMF and the European Union for another rescue to Greece is encouraging for the markets, but international financial risks would remain high in the short term while the prices of primary goods would remain above their historical averages. . Tensions in the Middle East continue to be a focus of geopolitical risk for the world economy.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand develop within the foreseen in the most recent Monetary Policy Report. Credit to the private sector is expanding at a rate similar to that recorded at the end of 2011, while inflation expectations remain around the 2012 target.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve the inflation target of 5.5% ± 1% for 2012, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the global and domestic economy in order to react in a timely manner to risks related to the price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
