At its monetary policy meeting in February 2014, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic will maintain the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 6.25% per year.

The decision regarding the reference rate affected in the evaluation of the balance of risks regarding inflation projections and market expectations. The annual rate of inflation decreased for the sixth consecutive month, closing in January 2014 at 2.82%. This inflation rate is below the lower end of the target range of 4.5% ± 1%. In monthly terms, inflation was 0.23% in the first month of the year, well below expectations. Similarly, year-on-year core inflation, the quality associated with inflation pressures of monetary origin, is reduced by 3.43%.

In the external context, the relevant international environment is characterized by a recovery scenario in developed threats, especially in the United States of America (USA), while some of the largest emerging threats, with weak macroeconomic foundations, capital outflows. According to the latest projections of the Consensus Forecast, the US would grow 2.9% in 2014 and 3.0% in 2015, while inflation would remain below 2.0% during that period. Given the weak price growth, the Federal Reserve is expected to maintain interest rates at current levels, between 0 and 0.25%, at least until 2015.
In the Euro Zone, economic activity decreased by 0.4% in 2013, but the Consensus Forecast projects an important recovery in 2014 and 2015, with positive growth of 1.0% and 1.4%, respectively. Given that the world economy is still growing below its potential level, it is expected that both in this year and in 2015, inflationary pressures on the world economy will remain low. Although some prices of raw materials have increased in international markets, there is a consensus that this behavior is transitory and an important moderation is expected in the coming months.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand are evolving positively, projecting a growth rate, according to the Macroeconomic Framework, around 4.5% in 2014, which would allow production to approach its potential level to the end of the year. Credit to the private sector in national currency continues to expand at a rate above the nominal product, around 13.0% in year-on-year terms, while the outlook for activities related to foreign trade improves, projecting a current account deficit of 4.0% of the Gross Domestic Product in 2014.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
