At its monetary policy meeting in February 2018, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.25% per annum.

The monetary policy decision was based on an exhaustive analysis of the balance of risks around inflation forecasts, the evolution of the main national macroeconomic indicators, the relevant international environment, market expectations and medium-term projections. Inflation in January 2018 was 0.29%, so that year-on-year inflation stood at 3.86%, slightly below the central value of the target range of 4.0% ± 1.0% established in the Monetary Program. Likewise, core inflation, related to monetary conditions, amounted to 2.43% year-on-year. It is expected that the interannual rate of inflation would remain within the target range in the monetary policy horizon of 24 months.

In the international arena, the outlook for the global economy continues to improve, according to the most recent forecasts of the Consensus Forecast (CFC), while inflation remains contained and labor markets are strengthened. In that sense, CFC estimates an expansion rate of 3.3% for the world economy in 2018, driven by growth of 2.8% in the United States of America (USA) and 2.3% in the Euro Zone (ZE). By 2019, the economic dynamism of the industrialized nations is expected to moderate slightly, with the US reaching a growth of 2.4% and the ZE of 1.9%. Likewise, in the developed world, inflationary pressures would remain moderate, with US inflation estimated at 2.3% in 2018 and 2.2% in 2019, and for the ZE a price increase of 1.5% in both years.

In the case of Latin America (AL), the recovery process would continue throughout the region with the exception of Venezuela, with an estimated growth of 2.6% for 2018 and 2.9% for 2019. International financial conditions remain favorable for emerging economies in the region. an environment of abundant liquidity worldwide. However, in the medium term, these conditions could change as the US fiscal reform and the monetary normalization of the Federal Reserve (FED) incentivize the return of capital to the United States. Precisely, in the press release published at the end of his last visit to the country, the IMF identified as a risk factor for the Dominican economy the possibility of facing more restrictive international financial conditions than expected. In addition, he pointed out as other important risk factors, the increase in international oil prices and weaker external demand than expected.

In the domestic context, the economy continues to react favorably to the monetary easing measures implemented in the last two quarters of last year. In that sense, preliminary information of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) show a year-on-year growth of 7.0% in the month of January. Likewise, credit to the private sector in national currency grew around 12.0% year-on-year, while at the same time improving the outlook for private investors, as is perceived in the evolution of the indicators of industrial confidence and business climate, corresponding to the Business Opinion Survey implemented by the BCRD. Projection models indicate that in the current year, economic growth could be between 5.5% and 6.0%.
On the fiscal policy side, capital spending experienced a notable recovery in the second half of 2017, which contributed to the recovery of economic activity. In the external sector, the current account closed last year with a deficit of -0.2% of GDP, which allowed historical international reserves to be accumulated, achieving a coverage of 4.4 months of imports. So far this year, international reserves have continued to rise, exceeding the record figure of US $ 8,000 million. The favorable evolution of the international environment would induce more dynamism in the foreign currency generating activities, which would continue to facilitate the relative stability of the exchange market.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy aimed at achieving the inflation target and maintaining macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world and national economy, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.