At its monetary policy meeting in February 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged is based on a detailed analysis of the risk balance around inflation forecasts, including information from international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. Inflation for the month of January 2019 was negative, registering a variation of -0.17% mainly influenced by the price behavior of the transportation and housing groups. In that sense, year-on-year inflation continued to decelerate to 0.71%, while core inflation, which excludes the prices of the most volatile goods and services, stood at 2.38%. The forecast system indicates that headline inflation would converge gradually to the center of the target range of 4.0% ± 1.0% in the year 2020.

In the external environment, forecasts are maintained that the world economy would grow 2.9% during 2019 and 2.8% in 2020, according to the Consensus Forecast (CFC). In the short term, the growth of global economic activity would continue to be driven by the United States of America (USA), however, there are some signs of moderation in its medium-term growth. Indeed, Consensus Forecast estimates that the US would expand 2.5% in 2019 and 1.8% in 2020. In this context and before a reduction in inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve has paused in the increases of its benchmark interest rate, that is, in the normalization process of its monetary policy, which is associated with greater uncertainty in the domestic and international environment facing the US.

On the other hand, Consensus Forecast continues to downgrade the growth prospects of the Euro Zone (ZE), estimating an expansion of 1.3% in 2019 and 1.4% in 2020. This moderation is influenced by the slowdown in some of its main economies , like Germany, Italy and France. Meanwhile, inflation projections for this group of countries are below their target, so it is expected that the European Central Bank will maintain its monetary policy stance in the medium term.
In the case of Latin America, the region is projected to grow 1.9% in 2019 and 2.5% in 2020, led by the Dominican Republic, Panama, Bolivia and Paraguay. In that order, the largest economy in the region, Brazil, having emerged from a recession, projects an economic growth of 2.4% in 2019, after the implementation of a stabilization and adjustment program that included, among other economic policies, increases salaries of 1.8% in 2018 and 4.6% in 2019. Economies with weak macroeconomic fundamentals, such as Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua, would remain in recession this year.

In terms of raw materials, the price of oil continues to increase gradually, reaching an average of about US $ 55 per barrel in February. The price of crude oil has been influenced by new cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), especially in Saudi Arabia, as well as a lower supply from Venezuela.

Domestically, in the current year economic activity maintains growth above potential, driven mainly by investment and private consumption, in a context of low inflationary pressures. At the end of February 2019, an expansion of credit to the private sector in national currency was observed around 10.5% year-on-year, consistent with the dynamism of the economy and monetary conditions that remain favorable.

On the fiscal policy side, during 2018 the moderation of disbursements was maintained, measured by total spending, as growth of 5.9% was observed, while the expansion of revenues reached 12.5% ??year-on-year. By 2019, the deficit of the Central Government is expected to close at 1.7% of GDP, as contemplated by the National Budget. The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic is attentive to the evolution of the normalization of the monetary policy of the United States, as well as to the behavior of international financial conditions and the global oil price, being prepared to react in a timely manner before any factor that may generate inflationary deviations. In this sense, the issuing entity reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability.