At its March 2014 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to maintain the monetary policy interest rate at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate takes into account the revision of the risk balance around the inflation projections and the market expectations. After decreasing in the previous six months, the year-on-year rate of inflation remained practically unchanged in February, at 2.84%, below the lower end of the target range of 4.5% ± 1%. This result was due to a monthly variation of 0.58% in the second month of the year. Likewise, the interannual core inflation was reduced to 3.25%.

In the external context, a scenario of recovery is maintained in the developed economies, especially in the United States, where the indicators of conjuncture show a better performance in private consumption, the housing market and the external sector, which allows us to foresee growth of 2.8% for the current year in an environment of low interest rates and lower unemployment. In the Euro Zone, a moderate recovery is estimated for 2014, around 1.1%, according to the Consensus Forecast. Emerging economies continue to grow, albeit at a more moderate pace. In the case of Latin America, the consensus points to a growth of 2.5% for 2014, in an environment of falling terms of trade in the region and lower liquidity in international markets. In recent months, the prices of some raw materials, particularly oil, as well as international financial conditions have remained relatively stable. The reduction in inflationary pressures worldwide would help to keep interest rates low for the rest of the year.
In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand maintain a healthy performance, showing a growth trend of around 5.0% in February, according to preliminary figures of the Monthly Index of Economic Activity. In the financial sector, credit to the private sector in national currency continues to expand at an interannual rate close to 13.0% in March and it is expected that by the end of the year, its growth will be around the expansion of the nominal product between 8.0 and 10.0%. The current account deficit projects to close the year at 4.2% of GDP, due to an improvement in net exports, tourism and free zones. Additionally, a positive performance of Foreign Direct Investment is expected which, together with remittances, would increase the flow of foreign currency to the Dominican economy and contribute to maintain the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
