The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its March 2012 Monetary Policy meeting, decided to maintain its Monetary Policy Rate unchanged at 6.75% per annum. At the same time, it decided to leave the Lombard Interest Rate unchanged at 9.0% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate is based on the fact that, in the month of February, the year-on-year rate of inflation fell to 6.0%, reaching within the target of 5.5% ± 1% for 2012. Likewise, the interannual core inflation it was reduced to 4.25% at the end of February, below its historical average. Given that the factors that affect the inflation forecasts have not changed significantly since the previous monetary policy meeting, the projections suggest that inflation would remain within the goal established in the Monetary Program.

In the external context, the United States indicators confirm the perspective of gradual recovery of that economy, while a moderation in the Asian economies is expected, mainly China and India. In Europe, recessive conditions remain, although there is a perception that fiscal adjustments in some countries and the restructuring of Greek debt have contributed to moderate international financial risks. The greater uncertainty facing this international scenario is related to the recent volatility of oil prices.

Latin America presents a favorable panorama, although not free of risks, according to the International Monetary Fund. Additionally, in its last macroeconomic report for the region, the Inter-American Development Bank considered that the region would face positive economic conditions in 2012, assuming a scenario with improvements in the US economy, a slight moderation in the Chinese economy and a short-term crisis. in Europe.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand are evolving within the provisions of the last Monetary Policy Report. Credit to the private sector is expanding at a rate close to 11%, consistent with the expansion of nominal GDP, while market inflation expectations remain around the target of 2012. So far this year, the pressures inflation have remained low, reaching inflation 0.35% in the month of February and an accumulated 0.79% during the first two months of the year. This has contributed to the fact that inter-annual inflation maintained its downward trend and that its level has converged to the target during the first quarter of this year, consistent with that indicated in previous press releases.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve the inflation target of 5.5% ± 1% for 2012, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the global and domestic economy in order to react in a timely manner to risks related to the price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
