BCRD keeps its monetary policy rate at 5.50% per year
At its monetary policy meeting in March 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to render the benchmark rate unchanged is based on detailed analysis of the risk balance around inflation forecasts, including information from international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. Inflation in February 2019 was 0.37%, leading to cumulative inflation of 0.20% in the first two months of the year. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation stood at 1.19%, while underlying inflation moderated to 2.26% in February, which excludes prices for the most volatile components. The BCRD's forecasting system and market expectations indicate that general inflation would gradually converge at the heart of the target range of 4.0% to 1.0% over the two-year monetary policy horizon.

In relation to raw materials, oil has maintained a gradual upward trend since the beginning of the year, with the price of the Texas intermediate barrel (WTI) trading around US $ 60 at the end of March. Crude oil price performance has reflected lower supply in the face of cuts in production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and economic sanctions on oil-producing countries such as Iran and Venezuela.

In the domestic context, the Monthly Indicator for Economic Activity (IMAE) notes that the Dominican economy continues to grow above its potential, with a year-on-year expansion of 5.9% in the January-February period of this year, driven mainly by investment and private consumption, while highlighting the good performance of the Construction sectors (11.9%), Mining (11.5%), Financial Services (9.5%), Transport and Storage (6.5%), Free Zones (4.5%), among others. The dynamism of domestic demand, coupled with favorable monetary conditions, has contributed to the continued growth of credit to the private sector in national currency at year-on-year rates of more than 10.0%.

With regard to fiscal policy, there is a balanced balance sheet of the Non-Financial Public Sector at the beginning of the year, with a primary surplus expected to be maintained during 2019, as envisaged in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as tourism, remittances and foreign direct investment maintain remarkable dynamism, contributing to relative exchange rate stability and facilitating the accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic remains attentive to the evolution of international financial conditions and the dynamics of the price of oil at a global level, as well as the potential impact of climate phenomena on the domestic economy, being prepared to react in a timely manner to any factor that may generate inflationary diversions. In this regard, the issuing body reaffirms its commitment to driving monetary policy towards the achievement of its inflation target and the smooth functioning of the financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability.