At its monetary policy meeting in March 2015, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to reduce its monetary policy interest rate (MPR) by 50 basis points, from 6.25% per annum to 5.75% per annum, to as of April 1, 2015. According to the BCRD's short-term liquidity management scheme, the rate of paid deposits (overnight) was reduced to 4.25% per annum. Likewise, the rate of expansion facilities, through purchases of securities with repurchase agreements (repos), decreased to 7.25% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate was adopted taking into consideration the analysis of the perspectives of the main macroeconomic variables, especially the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as the expectations of the market and the relevant international environment. The interannual inflation rate remained below February's target of 4.0% ± 1%, falling to 1.02%. The projections point to an inflation that would remain below the target range in the current year. Core inflation, related to the monetary conditions of the economy, was 2.76%, falling below its historical average.

On the other hand, with this measure it is expected that the real interest rate will reverse the upward trend that has been exhibiting in recent months, thus improving the liquidity conditions of the financial system. This measure is consistent with the reserve accumulation process and with the change in the composition of the legal reserve coverage recently adopted.
In the external sphere, the recovery process of the economic activity in the developed countries continues, driven by the effects of an expansive monetary policy. According to Consensus Forecast, the United States of America (USA) would grow 3.1% in 2015, while the Euro Zone and Japan would grow by 1.4% and 1.1%, respectively. On the other hand, Latin America on average continues showing signs of slowdown, influenced by the largest countries in the region. For 2015, the economic expansion projection for Latin America is 0.9%, similar to the growth achieved in 2014.

In the international capital markets, the financial conditions for the emerging economies have been more restrictive in the last month, while the US dollar, although it has declined slightly in the last week, is trading at the highest level since the outbreak of the international crisis. The prices of basic goods have fallen during the last months, particularly those of oil. It is expected that this behavior of oil prices would continue for the rest of the year. According to the US Federal Reserve, there would be no upward movement of its monetary policy interest rate in the coming months.

In the domestic context, economic activity remains dynamic, growing 6.6% in January 2015, according to preliminary figures of the monthly indicator of economic activity (IMAE). In March, the annual growth rate of total credit to the private sector in national currency expanded by about 13.4% with respect to the same month of the previous year. In the area of ??fiscal policy, there has been an improvement in collections in the first months of the year, while budgetary execution remains oriented toward meeting the deficit target of the Central Government, around 2.4% of GDP in 2015. Additionally, external accounts point towards a current account deficit of around 2.0% of GDP for the end of the year, contributing to the maintenance of relative stability in the foreign exchange market and a greater accumulation of international reserves.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
