At its monetary policy meeting in March 2018, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to maintain its monetary policy interest rate at 5.25% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged was based on an exhaustive examination of the risk balance around inflation forecasts, the main national macroeconomic indicators, the relevant international environment, market expectations and medium-term projections. Inflation for the month of February 2018 was -0.11%, which is why inflation accumulated in the first two months of the year reached 0.18% and year-on-year inflation stood at 3.32%. On the other hand, core inflation, related to monetary conditions, was placed at 2.46% year-on-year. Forecasts indicate that inflation would remain during the monetary policy horizon within the target range of 4.0% ± 1.0% established in the Monetary Program.

In the international environment, the global economic outlook continues to improve, according to the most recent forecasts of the Consensus Forecast (CFC). In that sense, CFC estimates an expansion rate of 3.3% for the world economy in 2018, driven mainly by the dynamism of the industrialized economies. United States of America (USA) would grow 2.8% and the Euro Zone (ZE) would expand by 2.3% in the current year. By 2019, the economic dynamism of developed nations is expected to continue, with the US reaching a growth of 2.6% and the ZE of 1.9%. Likewise, inflationary pressures would remain moderate in advanced economies, with US inflation estimated at 2.4% in 2018 and 2.1% in 2019, and for the EZ of 1.5% in both years. In the case of Latin America (LA), the recovery prospects point to a growth of 2.6% for 2018 and 2.9% for 2019. Only Venezuela would remain in recession during the projection period.

It should be noted that the Federal Reserve Bank of the US adjusted its monetary policy rate (MPR) up by 0.25 percentage points, raising it to a range between 1.50% and 1.75%, in a movement expected by the market and in response to potential inflationary pressures associated with the economic boom of that country. The market expects at least four additional increases in the US MPR in 2018 and 2019. However, international financial conditions continue to be favorable for emerging economies in an environment of abundant liquidity, while prices of primary goods, mainly oil , have resumed their upward trend in the current year.
In the domestic context, the Dominican economy continues under the favorable effects of the monetary stimulus launched in the second half of last year. In that sense, preliminary information shows that in February the trend-cycle of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE), which excludes the irregular component of the series which moderates its volatility, would be growing 6.2% year-on-year. In this context in which the economy grows above its potential, private loans in national currency maintain their dynamism, registering a growth of over 13% year-on-year to March. It is important to note that the forecast models indicate that in the current year, economic growth could be around 6.0% year-on-year.

On the fiscal policy side, government revenues have remained above the amount budgeted during the first quarter of the year. In this environment of higher fiscal revenues, the prospects for meeting the fiscal deficit target of 2.2% of GDP for 2018 improve. In the external sector, dynamism in foreign exchange generating activities continues, such as tourism, remittances and direct foreign investment, which facilitates the relative stability of the foreign exchange market and the strengthening of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy aimed at achieving the inflation target and maintaining macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy, particularly the prices of hydrocarbons, as well as the monetary, fiscal and commercial policies of the USA. In addition, at the national level, the institution will continue to monitor the main risks, in order to adopt the necessary measures for possible effects on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.