BCRD cuts its monetary policy rate to 3.50% per year
At an extraordinary monetary policy meeting on Monday, March 16, 2020, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to reduce its monetary policy interest rate by 100 basis points from 4.50% to 3.50% per annum, preemptively in the face of a significant increase in global uncertainty associated with the economic impact of coronavirus. At the same time, it decided to modify the interest rate broker of the BCRD's short-term liquidity management scheme, lowering the interest rate on the permanent ease of expansion (Repos to 1 day), from 6.00% to 4.50% per year, while the interest rate on paid deposits (Overnight) is reduced from 3.00% to 2.50% per year.

A number of liquidity provision measures were also adopted, both in national and foreign currency, with the aim of making a large amount of resources available to financial institutions in such a way that credit demand from the productive sectors and Dominican households can be effectively met. Specifically, in national currency more than RD$52 billion is available to financial institutions. First, the Monetary Board authorized the flexibilization of the requirements for the coverage of the legal fit in national currency, recognizing as valid coverage the securities of the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance up to RD$22,321.0 million, equivalent to 2.0 percentage points of the statutory lace ratio, to be earmarked as loans to households and productive sectors, equivalent to 2.0 percentage points of the statutory lace ratio, to be earmarked as loans to households and productive sectors , at interest rates in all cases not more than 8.0% per annum. In addition, liquidity is provided through the Repos window up to 90 days for up to RD$30 billion, with interest rates of 4.75% for Repos up to 30 days and 5.0% for Repos between 31 and 90 days, and these facilities may be renewed while the conditions that gave rise to these measures persist.

On the other hand, liquidity in foreign currency of more than US$ 500 million will be provided through two mechanisms: (1) 90-day Repos operations for up to US$300 million through the electronic currency platform; and (2) the temporary easing of the legal lace coverage requirements in foreign currency of multiple banks, recognizing Ministry of Finance securities in dollars as a valid coverage of US$ 222 million, representing 2.5 percentage points of the legal lace ratio in foreign currency. These measures will help facilitate the channeling of foreign exchange to generator sectors such as tourism and exports that have been impacted by the decline in global trade and tourism flows.

In addition, the Monetary Board approved a special regulatory treatment of the financial system while the overall uncertainty for the purpose of mitigating the potential impact of coronavirus on the financial system and economic operators remains. Specifically, it was authorized to: (1) freeze the qualifications and provisions of debtors at the level they were at the time of approval of this measure; (2) in the restructuring of claims, the same risk rating of the debtor shall be maintained, without generating additional provisions; (3) consider as unexpired loans disbursed against lines of credit for a period of sixty days and (4) extend for ninety days the period given to the debtor for the updating of guarantees corresponding to the appraisals. These measures will allow the timing of the payment schedule of bank debtors to be adjusted, the potential impact on the cash flow of companies moderated and the credit portfolio avoided due to the effects of COVID-19 on the performance of some productive activities.

These monetary and financial measures are based on an analysis of the potential impacts of uncertainty on macroeconomic stability and take into account low inflationary pressures. In this sense, February's monthly inflation was -0.13%, while underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, stood at 2.50% in February. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from February 2019 to February 2020, stood at 3.66%, remaining within the target range of 4.0% to 1.0%. Moving forward, the BCRD's forecasting system indicates that inflation would maintain a downward trend in the coming months, hovering around the lower bound of the target range during 2020. The absence of inflationary pressures gives the BCRD additional degrees of freedom to react in a timely manner, if necessary.

In the international environment, the accelerated spread of coronavirus has forced strong containment measures, which would have a significant impact on global economic activity. As a result, Consensus Forecasts (CFC), which brings together leading analyst firms that make international projections, slowed its global growth outlook from 2.5% in 2019 to 2.1% by 2020. If the spread trend of the virus continues, these projections are expected to continue to be revised downwards due to their effects on global production, trade and tourism. In response to these recent developments, central banks around the world have taken measures to monetary easing and provide liquidity.

In the United States of America, Consensus Forecasts projects that growth would moderate from 2.3% in 2019 to 1.6% by 2020. In a context of uncertainty, significant stock market decline and low inflationary pressures, the Fed reduced the federal funds rate by 150 basis points in two emergency meetings, placing it in the range of 0% - 0.25%, while expanding liquidity provision programs to the financial system through Repos for up to 90 days and purchases on the secondary market for Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities.

As for the Euro Area, Consensus projects an even smaller expansion of 0.6% by 2020. In response to the potential impact of coronavirus, the European Central Bank extended the liquidity provision programme for private credit pipeline through financial institutions and expanded the purchase of sovereign debt securities on the secondary market. It also keeps the short-term deposit rate (overnight) at -0.50% per annum. On the other hand, Latin America, which was already facing a weakened economic situation, has been affected by the impact of coronavirus on commodity prices, causing a reduction in the regional growth outlook to 0.8% by 2020. In this context, several central banks such as Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Costa Rica have lowered their interest rates this year, as well as taking liquidity provision measures through financial institutions.

High uncertainty and weakening global demand has manifested itself crucially in the prices of most commodities, highlighting the significant reduction in the price of Texas intermediate oil, with the price of Texas falling below $30 a barrel in recent days, equivalent to a year-on-year drop of about 50%. However, the price of gold remains around $1,500 per troy ounce, being used as a value shelter in an environment of high uncertainty. This price behaviour of primary goods implies an improvement in terms of exchange for the Dominican Republic, which would partially offset the potential impact of coronavirus on the external sector.

It is important to note that this adverse shock finds the Dominican economy with strong macroeconomic fundamentals, reflected in growth around potential, low and stable inflation, dynamic credit to the private sector, and high levels of international reserves, giving it a greater capacity to react. to face the challenges derived from it. In addition, the Dominican financial system exhibits a stable position with appropriate levels of liquidity, solvency and profitability, in addition to having a low-risk portfolio, which constitutes a support for the proper implementation of these measures.

In this context, preventive measures by the Central Bank and the Monetary Board will contribute to preserving economic stability, giving security and certainty to private agents in such a way that a favorable environment is maintained to sustain the proper functioning of the economy and preserve the Dominican productive apparatus.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy towards the achievement of its inflation target and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this sense, the institution will continue to monitor the economic impact of the coronavirus and the other factors of uncertainty and its effects on the Dominican economy, being prepared and with sufficient spaces to continue reacting in a timely manner to factors that may generate deviations from the inflation target and affect economic growth.