The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of April 2016, decided to keep the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference interest rate takes into account that the forecast models predict that inflation would converge to the lower range of the target of 4.0% ± 1.0% in the monetary policy horizon. In the same way, market expectations are placed around this prediction. In March, the interannual inflation rate stood at 1.59%, while the interannual core inflation, related to monetary conditions, reached 1.52%. It should be noted that in the first quarter of the year, the Dominican economy accumulated a general inflation of -0.58%.

In the external context, the behavior of the world economy is influenced by a mixed picture in which advanced economies, on average, show a moderate recovery, while emerging markets remain relatively stagnant. In this environment, according to Consensus Forecast, the world economy would grow 2.4% in 2016 and 2.8% in 2017. The United States of America (USA) would expand around 2.0% in 2016 and 2.4% in 2017, while the Euro Zone would grow in 1.5% and 1.6%, during those years, respectively.
Latin America (AL), as a whole, would present a contraction in its production of -0.6% in 2016, due to the recession experienced by Venezuela (-7.8%), Brazil (-3.8%), Argentina (-1.1%) and Ecuador (-1.0%), without taking into account the economic impact of the recent earthquake. Likewise, the growth of other important countries in the region would be positive, but it would remain below the average of the last 5 years. Such is the case of Mexico (2.4%), Chile (1.8%), Colombia (2.4%) and Uruguay (1.5%). For 2017, a moderate recovery of LA is expected with a growth rate of around 2.0%.

Recently, the prices of some primary goods, particularly oil, have shown an upward trend, surpassing, in the case of this commodity, US $ 45 per barrel. International financial markets have been relatively calm, moderating restrictive financial conditions, while long-term interest rates in advanced countries are historically low.

Internally, economic activity evolves positively in the short term. According to preliminary information, the Gross Domestic Product grew by 6.1% in the first quarter of 2016. In that sense, credit to the private sector in national currency registered an annual growth rate of around 13% in April, higher than the expected expansion of nominal GDP. It should be noted that the open unemployment rate fell from 6.0% to 5.7%, from April 2015 to April 2016 and the rate of expanded unemployment was 13.3%, the lowest of the last two decades.
Additionally, for 2016 it is estimated that the current account deficit will be around 1.9% of GDP, while the budget deficit closes around 2.3% of GDP. In a context of solid macroeconomic fundamentals like the current one, it facilitates the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate, as well as an accumulation of international reserves over and above what is planned in the Monetary Program and the sustainability of public finances.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to adopt new measures in the face of risks on price stability and the good functioning of the financial and payment systems.
