At its monetary policy meeting in April 2018, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.25% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged was based on the review of the balance of risks around inflation forecasts, as well as on the analysis of the main national macroeconomic indicators, the relevant international environment, market expectations and medium-term projections of this set of variables. Inflation for the month of March 2018 was 0.37%, which is why cumulative inflation in the first quarter of the year reached 0.55% and year-on-year inflation rose to 3.91%. Likewise, core inflation, linked to monetary conditions, was placed at 2.57% year-on-year. The forecasts indicate that inflation would remain within the target range of 4.0% ± 1.0% established in the Monetary Program in the monetary policy horizon.

In the international environment, the global economic outlook remains dynamic, led by the growth of the industrialized economies. In fact, at the recent spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, more favorable global economic prospects were presented, highlighting that this is the greatest dynamism exhibited since 2011, amid favorable financial conditions and balanced risks. Indeed, according to its most recent report on the prospects of the world economy (WEO), the IMF forecasts a 3.9% growth for the world economy, both in 2018 and 2019. Among the developed economies, The IMF report highlights the growth projection of the United States of America (USA) with expansions of 2.9% in 2018 and 2.7% in 2019, followed by growth forecast for the Euro Zone (ZE) of 2.4% and 2.0% during those years. In the case of Latin America (AL), the IMF's growth outlook points to an expansion of 2.0% for 2018 and 2.8% for 2019. Only Venezuela would remain in recession during the projection period.

In terms of inflation, pressures on prices would remain moderate in advanced economies, with rates estimated at 2.5% in 2018 and 2.4% in 2019 for the US and 1.5% and 1.6% in those years for the EZ. In Latin America, average inflation, excluding Venezuela, would close the year at around 5.9%, according to Consensus Forecast.

As a result of better international economic performance, among other factors, prices of primary goods, mainly oil, have maintained their upward trend in the first half of the year. In that sense, the average price of a barrel of oil is around US $ 64 so far this year and it is expected to be gradually reduced, converging to about US $ 60 / barrel at the end of 2018.

In the domestic context, economic activity continues to evolve favorably in the short term. Taking into account the evolution of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity during the first two months of the year, the real product would expand above its potential in the first quarter, in a favorable international context and a domestic environment where the effects of the monetary stimulus remain of last year. In this regard, loans to the private sector in local currency grew around 13.5% year-on-year to the month of April, while monetary aggregates presented growth rates consistent with this credit expansion.
On the fiscal policy side, government revenues have remained above the amount budgeted during the first four months of the year, improving the outlook for compliance with the fiscal deficit target of 2.2% of GDP established in the 2018. In the external sector, dynamism continues in foreign exchange generating activities, such as tourism, remittances and foreign direct investment, which facilitates the relative stability of the foreign exchange market and the strengthening of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy aimed at achieving the inflation target and maintaining macroeconomic stability. In this sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy, as well as the main risks in the domestic context, in order to adopt the necessary measures in the face of possible effects on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
