BCRD keeps its monetary policy rate at 5.50% per year
At its monetary policy meeting in April 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to leave the benchmark rate unchanged is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including information from international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. Inflation for march 2019 was 0.65%, so cumulative inflation in the first three months of the year stood at 0.86%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation stood at 1.47% in March, while underlying inflation, which excludes prices for the most volatile components, stood at 2.15%. The BCRD's forecasting system and market expectations indicate that overall inflation would remain low, gradually approaching the centre of the target range of 4.0% - 1.0% over the two-year monetary policy horizon.

In the international environment, trade war in larger economies, coupled with geopolitical tensions and increased uncertainty in international financial markets, led to a downward revision of global growth. In this regard, Consensus Forecast estimated that the world economy would grow 2.7% in 2019 and 2.8% by 2020. The performance of advanced economies continues to be boosted by the United States of America, expanding by 3.2% during the first quarter of 2019. However, signs of a gradual slowdown in the US persist, projecting growth of 2.4% in 2019 and 2.0% by 2020. This context of lower growth in the U.S., coupled with low inflationary pressures led to a pause in the Federal Reserve's monetary normalization. Moreover, market analyst projections point to a possible reduction in the EDF's monetary policy rate this year.

On the other hand, in the face of a moderation in the growth of large economies such as France, Germany and Italy, the growth prospects for the Eurozone (EEG) continue to be downwards. Consensus Forecast estimates expansions of 1.1% and 1.3% for 2019 and 2020, respectively. The projections also indicate that ZE inflation would remain below its target for years to come. In this way, the European Central Bank would exhibit a more expansive-than-expected monetary policy stance by keeping its benchmark interest rate unchanged and through new programmes to stimulate the channeling of credit to the private sector through financial institutions. In this regard, international financial conditions would remain favourable for emerging economies.
In Latin America, growth forecasts have also been revised downwards by 1.6% for 2019 and recovering to 2.5% by 2020. Within the region, economies contrast with strong macroeconomic fundamentals with those that would remain in recession such as Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua, while other major economies in the region such as Brazil, Mexico, Ecuador and Uruguay would grow below 2.0% this year.

In terms of raw materials, the price of oil has shown a gradual upward trend since the beginning of the year associated with lower supply in the face of production cuts by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and economic sanctions on oil-producing countries such as Iran and Venezuela. The average price of Texas Intermediate Oil (WTI) barrel is expected to be around $60.0 this year, in line with the National Budget.

In the domestic context, the Monthly Economic Activity Indicator (IMAE) notes that the Dominican economy continues to grow above its potential, with a year-on-year expansion of 5.9% in the January-February period of this year, driven mainly by investment and private consumption. The dynamism of domestic demand, coupled with favourable monetary conditions, has contributed to the continued growth of credit to the private sector in national currency at year-on-year rates of around 10.0%.

With regard to fiscal policy, there is a balanced balance sheet of the Non-Financial Public Sector in the first two months of the year, with a primary surplus expected to be maintained during 2019, as envisaged in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities maintain remarkable dynamism, highlighting tourism, remittances and foreign direct investment; which has contributed to the relative stability of the exchange rate and facilitating the accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic remains attentive to the evolution of international financial conditions and the dynamics of the price of oil at a global level, as well as the potential impact of climate phenomena on the domestic economy, being prepared to react in a timely manner to any factor that may generate inflationary diversions. In this regard, the issuing body reaffirms its commitment to driving monetary policy towards the achievement of its inflation target and the smooth functioning of the financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability.