At its monetary policy meeting in April 2015, the Central Bank decided to reduce its monetary policy interest rate by 50 basis points, from 5.75% per year to 5.25% per year, as of May 1, 2015. According Under the BCRD's short-term liquidity management scheme, the rate of overnight deposits was reduced to 3.75% annually. Likewise, the rate of expansion facilities (repos) decreased to 6.75% annually.

The decision on the reference rate was adopted based on the analysis of the perspectives of the main macroeconomic variables, especially the balance of risks regarding inflation projections, market expectations about the future trajectory of this variable, economic growth. and the exchange market, as well as the evaluation of the international environment relevant to the Dominican economy.

The year-on-year rate of inflation remained below the target of 4.0% ± 1%, falling to 0.64% in March. On the other hand, the accumulated inflation during the first three months of the year was 0.16%. Projections indicate that inflation would remain below the lower limit of the target established in the Monetary Program for 2015. Furthermore, in March, core inflation, related to the monetary conditions of the economy, was 2.59% year-on-year.

Externally, the available data confirms that the recovery process of developed economies is still ongoing, supported by expansionary monetary policies. However, for the United States of America (USA), preliminary figures show that the economy registered annualized inter-quarterly growth in January-March of 0.2%, a rate below that expected by the market. Under this perspective, Consensus Forecast adjusted its growth forecasts for the United States for 2015, from 3.1% to 2.9%, in turn the International Monetary Fund corrected downwards its projection from 3.6% to 3.1% for the current year.
On the other hand, the outlook for the Eurozone has improved, adjusting upward its growth projections for 2015, from 1.1% in the March report to 1.5% in April, while Japan would grow by 1.0% this year. China has shown signs of slowing down and its growth would be below 7.0% in 2015. In Latin America, the Consensus Forecast economic expansion forecasts have been reduced from 0.8% to 0.5% for 2015. International financial conditions improved in the last month, while the dollar continues to show strength, while oil prices are between US $ 50 and US $ 60 per barrel. Other commodities exhibit similar behavior, registering significant reductions in their prices.


In the domestic sphere, economic activity evolves favorably, with the monthly economic activity indicator (IMAE) growing 6.5% year-on-year during the first two months of the year. Likewise, the annual growth rate of credit to the private sector in national currency was around 12.5% ??in April, compared to the same month of the previous year. Regarding fiscal policy, the budgetary execution indicates that the deficit target of the Central Government, around 2.4% of GDP in 2015, would be met. Fiscal collections grow around 10.5%, above what is estimated in the Budget. 2015. Additionally, external accounts point to a current account deficit of around 2.0% of GDP by the end of the year, facilitating relative stability in the exchange market and the accumulation of international reserves above what was planned in the Monetary Program. .

The Central Bank ratifies its commitment to implement the monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures in light of risks to the stability of prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.