At its monetary policy meeting in May 2016, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to maintain the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 5.0% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around inflation forecasts, market expectations, as well as the recent evolution of the main macroeconomic variables. In April, the interannual rate of inflation was 1.75%, this variable remaining below the lower end of the target range of 4.0% ± 1% for 2016. The accumulated inflation in the first four months of the year is - 0.67%, while core interannual inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, was 1.51% at the close of the fourth month of the year.

In the external sphere, the outlook for the world economy, according to the Consensus Forecast, points to a growth of 2.4% in 2016 and 2.8% in 2017. In the United States of America (USA), however, Consensus's growth forecast it was adjusted to fall from 2.0% to 1.8% for the current year 2016, expecting a recovery of the economy with an expansion of 2.3% in 2017. In light of these events, the implicit probability of an increase in the monetary policy rate of the FED has increased, judging by the future contracts of the market, reason why a possible increase in the next months is expected. Although a decision of this type could affect the performance of bond placements in international markets, it would also generate an appreciation of the dollar that could cause a further reduction in oil prices. These possible impacts of an increase in the FDM of the FED have, to a large extent, been internalized by the market. In that sense, the eventual increase in the FED's rates should not have a significant short-term effect on the Dominican economy.
Regarding the economies of other regions of the world, Consensus Forecast maintained its projection of growth for the Euro Zone, which implies that the economy would expand around 1.6%, both in 2016 and in 2017. On the other hand, Latin America (AL) would present a contraction in its gross domestic production of -0.6% in 2016, mainly due to the recession experienced by countries such as Venezuela (-8.6%), Brazil (-3.7%), Ecuador (-1.7%) and Argentina ( -1.1%). It should be noted that other important economies of the region would have positive growth, but below the average of the last 5 years. Such is the case of economies such as Mexico (2.4%), Chile (1.8%), Colombia (2.4%), Costa Rica (3.6%) and Uruguay (1.3%). It is expected that by 2017, the average growth of the LA economies will become positive, reaching an expansion of around 2.0%.

The prices of primary goods, particularly that of some commodities of importance in foreign trade transactions in the Dominican Republic, have been exhibiting an upward trend in the last two months. In that sense, WTI oil has been close to US $ 50 a barrel, while gold has approached US $ 1,300 a troy ounce, a price higher than that contemplated in the 2016 National Budget.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity continues to show growth above its potential, with a preliminary record of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE), a robust year-on-year expansion of 10.1% in the month of April. During the period January-April, the accumulated growth of the IMAE was 7.1%, compared to the same period last year. It is important to note that all sectors of the economy posted positive year-on-year growth in April, with construction (36.2), financial services (13.3%), local manufacturing (11.7%), commerce (11.1%) and the recovery of the sector standing out. agriculture (6.0%), among others.

In the financial sector, credit to the private sector grew around 13.8% in May and is expected to expand at a rate close to 12.0% at the end of the year. With regard to fiscal policy, the Government is expected to comply with the forecast budget deficit for the end of the year at around 2.3% of GDP. In turn, in the external sector, the current account deficit would be around 1.9% of GDP by the end of the year. In this context, the exchange market would remain relatively stable and allow a continuous accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
