BCRD keeps its monetary policy rate at 3.50% per year
At its monetary policy meeting in May 2020, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 3.50% per annum. In addition, the interest rate for the permanent ease of expansion (Repos to 1 day) remains at 4.50% per annum, while the interest rate on paid deposits (Overnight) stands at 2.50% per year.

The decision on the benchmark rate is based on a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the current uncertainty on macroeconomic stability and future inflation developments. In this sense, April's monthly inflation was -0.82%, while cumulative inflation during the first four months of the year was -1.14%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from April 2019 to April 2020, was moderated to 1.07%, below the target range of 4.0% to 1.0%, while the underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, reached 2.75%. Moving forward, the BCRD forecasting system indicates that inflation would remain below the lower bound of the target range for the remainder of 2020. Low inflationary pressures give the BCRD greater degrees of freedom to continue reacting in a timely manner to the adverse impact of COVID-19 on the Dominican economy, if necessary.

In the international environment, high uncertainty prevails, even though, in those economies that have passed the most critical phases of the pandemic, containment measures that forced the cessation of productive activities and which have widened economic growth are beginning to be lifted. In this regard, Consensus Forecasts (CFC), which brings together leading analyst firms that make international projections, significantly reduced global growth projections from 2.5% in 2019 to -4.1% in 2020. In response to the weakening of global growth, central banks around the world continue to implement monetary easing and liquidity provision measures to support their countries' domestic demands.In the United States of America (USA), Consensus Forecasts projects that economic activity would contract this year, moving from an expansion of 2.3% in 2019 to -5.4% by 2020. Indeed, growth in the U.S. economy moderated to 0.2% year-on-year during the first quarter, while in April the unemployment rate stood at 14.7%, the highest since the Great Depression of 1929. In addition, different indicators of consumption and industrial production suggest that the U.S. economy would show further deterioration in the second quarter of this year. In this context of low growth, higher unemployment and lack of inflation, the Federal Reserve (Fed) has adopted a group of expansive measures, keeping at low levels its federal fund rate that is in the range of 0% - 0.25%, as well as the various quantitative easing programs injecting liquidity through Repos, purchases of public and private titles in the secondary market and credit channeling programs for micro small and medium-sized enterprises.

As for the Euro Area, Consensus Forecasts projects that COVID-19 will cause an even greater contraction in this bloc of countries, ranging from 1.2% growth in 2019 to -7.9% by 2020. In response to this difficult outlook, the European Central Bank (ECB) keeps the short-term deposit rate (Overnight) at -0.50% per annum, while easing the terms of the private credit channelling programme through financial institutions and expanded the programme for the purchase of public and private securities on the secondary market.

On the other hand, the high uncertainty caused by the pandemic has led to an increase in volatility in capital flows and affected the growth prospects of emerging economies, leading to a widespread depreciation of their currencies against the US dollar. In particular, Latin America, which was already facing a weakened economic situation, has been affected by falling commodity prices and a global tourism flow, causing a regional contraction of -5.9% by 2020. In this context, central banks in the region continue to implement liquidity provision and credit channeling programmes to the private sector in a widespread manner.
In relation to raw materials, the price of Texas intermediate oil (WTI) has shown a partial recovery in May, influenced by the production cut agreed between countries belonging to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and its allies. Thus, the price of WTI was in May around US$30 a barrel, a level similar to the projection for the rest of the year. On the other hand, the price of gold remains high, around $1,700 per troy ounce, when it is used as a haven of value in a context of high uncertainty. The price dynamics of primary goods benefit the terms of trade for the Dominican Republic, which would partially offset, through lower oil bills and higher gold exports, the negative impact the pandemic has had on the external sector, particularly on tourism, remittances and exports as a result of the fall in the world economy.

Importantly, at the time of coVID-19 containment measures in the Dominican Republic, the economy was in a favourable cyclical position, characterized by growth around potential and low inflationary pressures. These strong macroeconomic fundamentals have given the flexibility to take expansive monetary measures to accommodate the adverse shock. Indeed, preliminary information from the Monthly Economic Activity Index (IMAE) indicates that economic activity slowed significantly in March relative to the rate of expansion observed in January and February, thus recording a 0.0% year-on-year change in the first quarter of 2020.

In this context, the Central Bank continues to implement a set of monetary and financial measures aimed at mitigating the effects of coronavirus through increased financing for productive sectors and households at lower interest rates. In particular, of the total RD$ 120 billion that have been made available to financial intermediation entities, some RD$ 64 billion have been channeled through different facilities, with some RD$56 billion being available to continue to support the productive activity and contribute to a rapid recovery in domestic demand during the rest of the year.

It is emphasized that, even under current conditions of high uncertainty, the resources provided by the BCRD are being channelled at a faster rate than all previous occasions when these monetary policy instruments have been used. As a result, there has been a significant reduction of about 300 basis points in interest rates on loans granted by multiple banks since the adoption of the measures and a greater dynamism in monetary aggregates.
In addition, favorable monetary conditions have contributed to an acceleration of credit to the private sector that expands at rates close to 14% year-on-year, highlighting the channelling of loans to the Manufacturing, Hotels and Restaurants, Trade and Construction sectors. The dynamism of private credit has increased access to working capital for sectors that have remained operating during the pandemic and provided greater liquidity to those activities that were suspended by confinement measures.

On the other hand, it should be noted that the disbursement of some US$651 million as emergency financial assistance by the IMF, together with the measures to provide liquidity in foreign currency of about US$ 622 million and the interventions in the foreign exchange market that have been made during this year for some US$2.2 billion, will contribute to maintaining the relative stability of the exchange rate in the face of a convulsing international environment. In addition, the central bank's high levels of International Reserves, equivalent to approximately 10% of GDP, are highlighted, so the institution reiterates that it has sufficient resources and tools to continue to support the foreign exchange market, so that all foreign exchange needs of economic actors and the general public are met.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this regard, the institution will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on the Dominican economy, being prepared to continue reacting in a timely manner to factors that could jeopardize the inflation target and affect macroeconomic stability.
