At its monetary policy meeting in June 2015, the Central Bank decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate was adopted after analyzing the national macroeconomic panorama, especially the balance of risks around the inflation projections and the expectations of the private sector, as well as the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. Indeed, the interannual rate of inflation in the month of May amounted to 0.23%, while in cumulative terms inflation stood at 0.19% at the end of that month.

 Likewise, core inflation, related to the monetary conditions of the economy, was 2.33% year-on-year in May. The projections continue to indicate that inflation would remain below the lower limit of the target established in the Monetary Program for 2015, converging to the center of the objective level of 4.0% ± 1.0% in the monetary policy horizon.

In the external sphere, the year-on-year growth of the United States of America (USA) in the first quarter of the year was corrected from a preliminary estimate of 2.4% to 2.9% in the month of June. However, the recent evolution of growth has led to a downward revision of the forecasts of the Consensus Forecast. In that sense, the US growth forecast was revised from 2.5% to 2.2% for 2015, while a recovery of around 2.8% is expected for 2016.
According to this source, the growth projections for the Euro Zone are around 1.5%. However, there is uncertainty as to the outcome of the crisis situation in Greece, which could have a negative impact on the European economy. The projections for Latin America were revised down from 0.4% to 0.3%, while Asia is expected to grow around 4.7% this year. In the last month, international financial conditions have been restricted, while the dollar has tended to appreciate. The price of oil would remain below the levels of recent years, at least until 2016.

In the domestic sphere, the economy evolves according to the projections. The cycle trend of the monthly indicator of economic activity (IMAE) shows a growth rate of 6.1% at the end of April. In the same way, the annual growth rate of credit to the private sector in national currency expanded by around 12.0% in June, in year-on-year terms.

It is expected that the dynamism of credit will continue to strengthen as the transmission mechanism of recent decisions to reduce the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) to the active interest rate is completed. It should be noted that the impact of the reductions in the MPR on the active rate would be even greater taking into account the latest resolution of the Monetary Board to allow the use of resources from the legal reserve for low-cost housing solutions. It is important to note that since the MPR was reduced for the first time, the weighted average of the active rate has fallen more than 175 basis points in the financial system.
On the side of fiscal policy, the rate of growth of incomes has exceeded the rate of expansion of public spending so far this year, obtaining a primary surplus above the one established in the 2015 National Budget of 0.4% of GDP. Likewise, external accounts are evolving satisfactorily, projecting a current account deficit of the Balance of Payments around 2.0% of GDP for the end of the year. This trend in external accounts will contribute to maintaining the relative stability of the exchange rate, while the BCRD continues with its process of accumulation of international reserves.

The BCRD reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.