At its monetary policy meeting in June 2018, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.25% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged was taken after exhaustively analyzing the balance of risks around inflation projections, the main national macroeconomic indicators, the relevant international environment, market expectations and medium-term forecasts. term. In a particular way, it was observed that in a context of economic growth above the potential and high credit dynamism, inflation continues within the target range, while the macroeconomic fundamentals remain strong, reflected in the good performance of the accounts fiscal and foreign exchange generating activities.

The accumulated inflation during the five months elapsed in the year amounts to 1.22%, as a monthly variation of 0.26% was observed in the consumer price index in May. The inter-annual inflation rate, from May 2017 to May 2018, was 4.47%, centered around the target range of 4.0% ± 1.0% established in the Monetary Program. Likewise, core inflation, linked to monetary conditions, was placed at 2.70% year-on-year. Forecasts indicate that inflation would remain within the target range in the two-year monetary policy horizon.

In the international environment, the relevant economic panorama maintains a positive trend, projecting, according to Consensus Forecast, a growth of the world economy around 3.3% in 2018 and 3.2% in 2019. In that sense, the United States of America (USA) would grow 2.9% in 2018 and 2.6% in 2019, at the same time that the economy of the Euro Zone would expand by 2.2% and 1.8%, respectively, during those years.

Emerging economies maintain a favorable outlook in the medium term, despite the uncertainty surrounding trade policy globally. In that sense, the Latin American economies would grow by an average of 2.1% in 2018 and 2.6% in 2019, with the Dominican Republic and Panama being the fastest growing economies. Venezuela would be the only economy in recession in the region when projecting contraction rates of -11.7% in 2018 and -2.5% in 2019
International financial conditions remain relatively favorable for emerging economies. However, to the extent that monetary policy in the US accelerates normalization and capital flows to that economy by pressing the dollar to the appreciation, these conditions could become restrictive.

International oil prices have resumed an upward trend attributable to growing demand due to global economic expansion, as well as restrictions in the supply of crude and geopolitical factors. These conditions represent external inflationary pressures in the short term.

In the domestic context, economic activity continues to evolve favorably, as can be observed in the trajectory of the monthly indicator of economic activity (IMAE). In effect, according to preliminary data, the IMAE registered an accumulated growth of 6.6% in the period January-May. In this way, the IMAE trend-cycle expands at an annual rate of 6.9% in the month of May, showing that the economy will continue to grow above its potential throughout the year.

Reflecting this dynamic, loans to the private sector in local currency continue to grow about 13% year-on-year as of June, while monetary aggregates show growth rates above the estimated nominal GDP expansion. On the fiscal policy side, preliminary figures show that as of May the Non-Financial Public Sector registered a surplus of around 0.2% of GDP. At that date, revenues from collections are above the budgeted amounts while public spending grows around 5.0%, which is consistent with the deficit target of -2.2% of GDP established in the 2018 Budget. 
In the external sector, the dynamism registered in the foreign currency generating activities substantially contributes to moderate the impact of higher oil prices on the Dominican economy, which facilitates the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate and the strengthening of reserves. international

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy aimed at achieving the inflation target and maintaining macroeconomic stability. In this sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy, as well as the main risks in the domestic context, in order to adopt the necessary measures in the face of possible effects on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.