The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its Monetary Policy Meeting of June 2013, decided to maintain its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (MPR) at 4.25%. According to the new short-term liquidity management scheme of the Central Bank, the interest rates of permanent expansion and monetary contraction facilities would remain at 6.25% and 2.25% annually, respectively.

The decision to keep the benchmark interest rate unchanged takes into account that both forecast models and market expectations predict that inflation would be around the target during the monetary policy horizon. In May, the year-on-year inflation rate stood at 4.99%, influenced by monthly inflation of -0.18% and accumulating 1.72% in the first five months of the year. Core interannual inflation stood at 5.0%. Likewise, this base scenario is based on the premise that the Government would be closing the year as estimated in the 2013 Budget. For such purposes, and after having decreased 22% year-on-year in January-April, an increase is expected. Year-on-year change in public spending of around 4% in the May-December period, with the aim of contributing to the reactivation of economic growth.

In the external context, faced with the announcement of a process of gradual dismantling of the monetary stimulus in the United States of America and with lower prospects for economic growth in the main emerging economies, a process of reversal of capital flows has begun, weakening the currencies of almost all economies with respect to the US dollar. In the case of the United States, some positive data are observed, particularly in the real estate market, consumer and car sales. On the other hand, the recession continues in the Euro Zone, although in the case of Germany, the economic activity figures for May were more positive than expected by the market. The prices of most of the raw materials in world markets show a moderation, highlighting a significant drop in the price of gold, nickel and other metals.
In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand showed low performance in the first quarter of 2013. However, some of the conjunctural indicators show an incipient improvement so far in the second quarter, influenced by monetary and economic measures. combined with the normalization of public spending. The Government has granted resources for public investment, small and medium-sized enterprises and the agricultural sector, while the Central Bank continues with its policy of releasing resources from the legal reserve, to influence the revitalization of private economic activity.

Credit to the private sector in national currency has accelerated, as a result of the reduction in legal reserve requirements and lower market interest rates. In this sense, almost half of the resources approved by the Central Bank for the financing of productive activities have been released. The recovery of private credit should contribute to a reactivation of consumption and private investment in the second half of the year.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to adopt new measures in the face of risks on price stability and the good functioning of the financial and payment systems.
