BCRD cuts its monetary policy rate to 5.00% per year

Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. At its monetary policy meeting in June 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to reduce its monetary policy interest rate by 50 basis points from 5.50% to 5.00% per year. According to the BCRD's short-term liquidity management scheme, the rate of paid deposits (overnight) decreases from 4.00% to 3.50% per year and the rate of permanent ease of expansion (repos) is reduced from 7.00% to 6.50% per year.

The decision to reduce the benchmark rate is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. May's monthly inflation was -0.03%, while cumulative inflation in the first five months of the year fell to 1.36%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from May 2018 to May 2019, fell to 1.31%, placing for the seventh consecutive month below the lower bound of the target range. Similarly, underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions by excluding prices of more volatile goods such as food and fuels, fell to 1.98% in May, while a downward revision in economic analyst inflation expectations for the entire monetary policy horizon was observed. Considering this decision, the BCRD forecasting system indicates that inflation would remain below the lower bound of the target range of 4.0% to 1.0% until the end of 2019, converging at the centre of the target by 2020.

Uncertainty has increased in the international environment, as geopolitical risks are heightened and trade disputes between larger economies persist. The slowdown in global economic activity has also continued. Faced with these conditions, the growth outlook for the global economy has been revised again downwards, with an expansion of 2.7% in both 2019 and 2020, according to Consensus Forecasts. br>
The performance of advanced economies remains led by the United States of America,S.A.), although current indicators show signs that this economy could slow in the medium term. Indeed, Consensus's outlook for U.S. growth has declined, noting that the economy would move from an expansion of 3.6% in 2018 to 2.5% in 2019 and to 1.8% in 2020. In this context, the Fed indicated that, in the face of increased uncertainty, it is prepared to implement expansive monetary measures to help sustain growth and avoid inflationary diversions, so market analysts expect a reduction in the benchmark interest rate at the next meeting in July.

In addition, the growth outlook for the Euro Zone (ZE) remains low, with expansions of 1.1% in 2019 and 1.3% in 2020, according to Consensus. Considering this picture and low inflationary pressures, the European Central Bank has stressed that it is assessing to reduce its monetary policy rate and implement new liquidity provision programmes, should economic conditions continue to deteriorate for this bloc of countries.

In Latin America, growth forecasts have been lowered for almost all economies, with 1.1% expansion expected for the region in 2019. It is important to stress that the behavior within the region is heterogeneous. On the one hand, recessionary conditions for Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua are accentuated, while the two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, are projected to grow by around 1.0%. On the other hand, a group of economies would continue to grow in a healthy way, such as Panama, Peru and Bolivia, and in particular the Dominican Republic, which would record the largest expansion in Latin America this year.

In relation to raw materials, recent volatility in oil prices has been associated with escalation of geopolitical conflicts in some of the major crude oil-producing economies. However, projections suggest that the average price of Texas intermediate oil (WTI) during 2019 would not exceed the value stipulated in the National Budget of US$60.5 a barrel, due to structural factors such as moderation in global demand and increased U.S. oil production capacity.

In the domestic context, according to preliminary information from the Monthly Economic Activity Index (IMAE), the economy expanded by 5.1% in the January-May period, moderating against the 5.7% growth observed in the first quarter of the year. The behaviour of economic activity reflected a slowdown in private investment, associated with external and internal uncertainty factors.

In a context of low inflationary pressures, the BCRD's decision to reduce the monetary policy rate, together with recent measures to free resources from the legal loophole, will speed up the mechanism for the transmission of monetary policy through a decrease in financial system interest rates and the dynamization of private credit, which will help boost economic growth around the levels provided for in the 5.5% Monetary Programme.

With regard to fiscal policy, the process of consolidation of public finances is maintained, with a primary surplus expected to be reached during 2019, as envisaged in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities, such as foreign direct investment, remittances and, to some extent, tourism, would continue to contribute to relative exchange rate stability and facilitate the accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to driving monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this regard, the issuing ministry will continue to monitor the moderation of the world economy and the uncertainty factors of the international environment, as well as its possible impact on the performance of domestic demand, being prepared to react in a timely manner to factors that may lead to deviations from the macroeconomic goals of the Monetary Programme.

