At its monetary policy meeting in June 2017, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.75% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around inflation forecasts and market expectations, as well as the evolution of the main national macroeconomic indicators and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. As of May, the interannual rate of inflation fell to 3.11%, remaining within the target range of 4% ± 1% established in the Monetary Program. Accumulated inflation in the first five months of the year was reduced to 0.96%. On the other hand, core inflation, related to monetary conditions, amounted to 2.20%. According to the most recent projections, inflation would remain within the target range in the monetary policy horizon.

In the international context, the economy of the United States of America (USA) would be growing 2.2% in 2017 and 2.4% in 2018, according to Consensus Forecast. In addition, inflation would be at 2.3% and 2.2% in 2017 and 2018, respectively. Recently, the International Monetary Fund adjusted its growth forecasts for the US economy downwards, while the market expects the monetary policy to continue normalizing with further rate increases by the Federal Reserve this year. On the other hand, in the Euro Zone, economic activity would continue to expand around the potential, registering annual rates of 1.8% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. Inflation in this block of countries would remain below the target of 2.0% of GDP. European Central Bank, reaching 1.6% and 1.4% in 2017 and 2018, respectively.
For Latin America, a recovery from the recession is expected in 2017, with the exception of Venezuela, which would continue to show negative growth. The projections indicate that the region would expand by 1.6% this year and 2.5% by 2018, driven by more favorable terms of trade, particularly for the commodity exporting economies. In the case of the countries of South America, forecasts of oil prices of around US $ 50 per barrel would imply an improvement over the past two years. In terms of international financial conditions, despite the increases in the monetary policy rate in the United States, a high degree of liquidity is maintained, being favorable for emerging economies.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity tends to converge gradually to its potential of 5.0%, in line with that contemplated in the Monetary Program. Credit to the private sector in national currency increases around an interannual rate of 11.0%, above the expected growth for production in nominal terms.

On the fiscal side, budget execution indicates a policy of reducing spending that points to a deficit by the end of the year, below the target set in the National Budget of -2.3% of GDP. In that sense, as of May, the year-on-year growth in public spending was negative, while collections were above the level estimated in the Budget. As a result of this behavior of revenues and expenses, the non-financial public sector deficit at the end of May was -0.5% of GDP estimated for the end of the year.
With regard to external accounts, foreign exchange generating activities maintain a good performance, contributing to the strengthening of international reserves and facilitating the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate. In this regard, it should be noted that in the first quarter of the year, the accumulated revenues from tourism and remittances amounted to US $ 1,979 million and US $ 1,455 million, respectively. Similarly, the arrival of non-resident passengers increased by 6.7% in interannual terms as of May.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and maintain macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
