At its monetary policy meeting in July 2016, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to leave its monetary policy rate (MPR) at 5% per annum.

The decision to keep the reference rate (TPM) unchanged takes into account the balance of risks around inflation forecasts, market expectations and the relevant international environment. In June, the interannual inflation rate stood at 1.91%, remaining below the target range. Core interannual inflation, associated with monetary conditions, stood at 1.62%. The forecast models predict that inflation would converge to the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0% in the monetary policy horizon of 24 months.

In the external context, after the shocks generated by the Brexit in the international financial markets, mainly in Europe, the stock indices rebounded while the capital flows to the emerging economies have increased. The dollar that is the international reserve currency remains strong and is expected to continue to appreciate in the coming months. The prices of oil and gold, important minerals for the Dominican economy, remain around US $ 45 per barrel and US $ 1,300 per troy ounce, respectively.

On the other hand, the recent projections of the IMF World Economic Outlook, published last July, present prospects for lower economic growth worldwide, similar to the trend forecast by the World Bank in June. In effect, Consensus Forecast estimates that the United States of America (US) economy would expand by 1.9% in 2016, considering that Brexit would have an extremely small effect on that economy, while the Eurozone would grow 1.5% and Latin America would maintain the expectation of contraction in 0.5% in this year. For 2017, the US growth projection is 2.2% and for the Euro Zone an expansion of 1.3% is expected, according to Consensus Forecast. For the same year, the IMF presents growth projections of 2.5% for the US and 1.4% for the Euro Zone.
In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand, observe a positive behavior in the short term to experience a growth above the potential level, together with a low and stable price variation. Credit to the private sector in national currency grows at an annual rate of 11.3% as of July. Total loans to the private sector, including financing in foreign currency, expanded around 13.6% during the same month, above the nominal product growth. In the fiscal sector, revenues grew at a rate of around 8.0% year-on-year, while spending showed a marked deceleration with respect to the previous months. It is expected that by the end of the year the budget deficit forecasts of approximately 2.3% of GDP will be met. Likewise, the projections of the external sector show that the current account deficit would close around 1.9% of GDP this year. If the current behavior of gold and oil prices continues, the current account deficit could be even lower. The evolution of the main macroeconomic variables supports the relative stability of the exchange market, while also facilitating the accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
