At its monetary policy meeting in July 2017, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to reduce its monetary policy interest rate by 50 basis points, from 5.75% per annum to 5.25% per annum, effective from 1 August. According to the short-term liquidity management scheme of the BCRD, the rate corridor was adjusted in the same proportion, which indicates that the rate of short-term remunerated deposits (overnight) falls from 4.25% to 3.75% per year and the rate of expansion facilities (repos) is reduced from 7.25% to 6.75% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, the evolution of the main national macroeconomic indicators, the relevant international environment and market expectations. Accumulated inflation in the first half of the year was 1.02%, while the year-on-year rate of inflation to June fell to 2.55%, below the lower limit of the target range of 4% ± 1% established in the Monetary Program. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, related to monetary conditions, was 2.18%. According to the most recent projections, inflation would approach the lower limit of the target range in the monetary policy horizon.

Since last year, three external factors have conditioned the behavior of the Dominican economy: (1) the positive shock of supply, associated with international oil prices, which had benefited the Dominican economy in recent years, was reversed; (2) the Federal Reserve of the United States of America (USA) resumed the normalization process of its monetary policy; and (3) the uncertainty surrounding the economic policies of the new US government increased.

However, since the last increase in the monetary policy rate in March, the international environment has changed. On the one hand, the increase in oil prices has moderated, reversing the upward trend shown by inflation in the Dominican Republic (DR). On the other hand, the process of normalization of the monetary policy of the United States has become more gradual and it is expected that the Federal Reserve would maintain an accommodative stance for the rest of the year. In addition, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised down the growth prospects of the US, to 2.1% in 2017 and 2018, under the argument that there would be no fiscal impulse in the short term.
Regarding the Euro Zone, the IMF projects a 1.9% growth in 2017 and 1.7% in 2018. On the other hand, Latin America would come out of recession, with the exception of Venezuela, registering moderate growth rates of 1.0% in 2017 and 1.9% in 2018.

In the domestic sphere, preliminary figures during the second quarter of the year indicate that economic growth was significantly below its potential, influenced by a strong slowdown in private investment and a significant reduction in public spending, particularly in the spending of capital, which has contributed to the deficit of the Non-Financial Public Sector (SPNF) to be -0.5% of GDP in May. Additionally, monetary aggregates and total loans to the private sector moderated their expansion in the face of a reduction in both the demand for money and the demand for credit, associated with the influence of external and internal factors on the expectations of private agents.

In this context, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reduced its legal reserve ratio by 2.2 percentage points, as a way to stimulate economic activity through credit in an environment of low inflationary pressures, since inflation is below the lower limit of the goal. It is expected that this set of monetary measures will contribute to economic growth resuming the expected dynamism and that inflation will be located around the lower limit of the target range of 4% ± 1% established in the Monetary Program of 2017.
With respect to external accounts, foreign exchange generating activities continue to show a favorable performance, contributing to keeping the current account deficit at low levels, while strengthening the accumulation of international reserves and contributing to the relative stability in the market. exchange

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and maintain macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.