At its monetary policy meeting in August 2015, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate was adopted after analyzing the balance of risks around the inflation projections and the expectations of the private sector, the national macroeconomic panorama, as well as the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. It was observed that the interannual rate of inflation rose to 0.50% in the month of July. In cumulative terms, inflation stood at 0.85% during the first seven months of the year. Likewise, core inflation, an indicator that reflects the monetary conditions of the economy, was 2.11% year-on-year. Forecasts continue to indicate that inflation would remain below the lower limit of the target set in the Monetary Program for 2015, gradually converging towards the center of the range of 4.0% ± 1.0% for 2016.
In the external sphere, the growth of the main industrialized economies continues to boost the world economy. Recent figures show that the United States of America (USA) grew 2.7% year-on-year during the second quarter of the year, while the Euro Zone expanded by 1.2% year-on-year in the same period. Both in the United States and in the Euro Zone, inflation remains low, standing at 0.2% year-on-year for the end of July, as a result of the downward trend shown by the prices of commodities in global markets. According to the latest forecasts of the Consensus Forecast (CFC), the EUA would grow around 2.3% and 2.7% in 2016. For CFC, the Eurozone would close this year with an expansion of 1.5% and achieve a rebound to 1.8% for 2016.

In addition to the behavior of commodities in international markets, other forces have been influencing the behavior of the global economy recently. On the one hand, the dollar has presented an appreciating trend over the last year, strengthening against other currencies such as the euro, the Japanese yen and the pound sterling. On the other hand, the markets have shown some concern with the lower growth observed in China to the point that, recently, the stock exchanges of the main world financial centers recorded a significant decline. With the aim of relaunching its growth, China reduced its monetary policy rate for the fourth time this year, while devaluing its currency, the Yuan, to boost exports. At the Central Bank, we are closely monitoring these events, although we understand that the short-term direct effects on our economy would be minimal.
With respect to Latin America, growth continues to decline, as a result of the slowdown in economic activity in some of the largest economies, particularly Brazil, Venezuela and Argentina. In the particular case of Brazil, the recession deepens after a 2.6% drop in the second quarter of the year. For Latin America as a region, Consensus Forecast estimates a contraction of 0.2% in 2015, recovering gradually in 2016 until reaching an expansion of 1.2% at the end of that year.

In the domestic environment, economic activity continues to show high dynamism. The cycle trend of the monthly indicator of economic activity (IMAE) shows a year-on-year growth rate of 6.4% in June, while private loans grew above 11.0% in July. In the fiscal context, the government continues with the process of fiscal consolidation initiated three years ago. Preliminary figures show that the operations of the Central Government recorded a surplus during the first semester of the year, which allows us to foresee that by the end of the year the target established in the National Budget would be met. Likewise, the conditions of the external sector remain favorable when registering a small surplus during the first six months of the year, as a result of the decrease in oil prices and the strengthening of tourism, remittances and the activity of free zones. Positive records in fiscal and external accounts for the first half of the year indicate that the fundamentals of the Dominican economy remain strong, facilitating the relative stability of the exchange rate and the accumulation of reserves.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
