At its monetary policy meeting for the month of August 2016, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep the monetary policy interest rate unchanged at 5.0% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as the performance of the rest of the main macroeconomic indicators and market expectations. Last July, the interannual rate of inflation was 1.85%, remaining below the target range of 4.0% ± 1%. In January-July, cumulative inflation was 0.36%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, amounted to 1.67% year-on-year. The forecast models predict that inflation would converge towards the goal established in the Monetary Program in the monetary policy horizon.

Externally, the most recent information shows a slight deceleration in the economy of the United States of America (USA) that grew 1.2% in the second quarter of the year, while inflation stood at 0.8%. Likewise, labor market conditions have improved in the US, with the unemployment rate at 4.9%, at the level of full employment. According to Consensus Forecast, US economic growth would reach 1.5% at the end of this year, recovering to 2.3% in 2017.

The Euro Zone expands at a growth rate of around 1.6% year-on-year in line with expectations. The Euro Zone inflation was 0.2% in the month of July, while unemployment has fallen to around 10%, driven by the fall of this labor indicator in Germany, where the unemployment rate stands at 4.2%. According to Consensus Forecast, the Euro Zone would expand by 1.5% in 2016 and 1.2% in 2017.
Among emerging economies, China would grow around 6.6% in 2016 and 6.2% in 2017, according to the IMF, while Latin America would continue in recession, closing the current year with a fall of -0.5% with significant reductions in growth in countries like Brazil, Venezuela, Ecuador and Argentina. For 2017, Latin America would exhibit an expansion of real GDP of 2.0%.

In primary goods markets, the price of oil remains around US $ 45 / barrel, below the average estimated in the National Budget. With regard to gold, its price experienced an increase of around 15% compared to 2015, standing at around US $ 1,300 a troy ounce, well above the price of US $ 1,100 with which the budget was drawn up. The evolution of gold and oil prices would help facilitate the execution of fiscal policy and achieve the expected results of the external sector.

In the domestic sphere, the Dominican economy showed a strong dynamism, growing 7.4% in January-June, driven by the expansion of real GDP of 8.7% during the second quarter of the year. Thus, the growth projection points to a rate of around 7.0%, well above that estimated in the Macroeconomic Framework for 2016. This growth would be the highest in Latin America for the third consecutive year. In the financial sector, credit to the private sector in national currency grew above 11.5% year-on-year, higher than the nominal product projection for the end of the year.
In the fiscal area, there is a moderation in spending in the second half of the year in line with the deficit target established in the Budget Law. In the external sector, the current account was positive in the first half of the year and it would close in 2016 with a small deficit between 1.7% and 1.9% of GDP. In this context, favorable conditions are maintained for the increase in international reserves and the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to continue conducting monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to stability of prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.