At its monetary policy meeting for the month of August 2014, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep the monetary policy interest rate unchanged at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as the performance of the rest of the main macroeconomic indicators and market expectations. Last July, the year-on-year rate of inflation fell to 3.41%, remaining around the lower end of the target range for 2014 of 4.5% ± 1%. The accumulated inflation in the seven months computed of the year is 1.93%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, remained at 3.32%.

Externally, the most recent information confirms that the economic conditions of the United States continue to improve. The US economy recorded a revised growth of 4.2% in the second quarter of the year, better than expected, pointing to an expansion rate of around 2.1% in 2014. The outlook for the Eurozone shows signs of weakening as it grows 0.3 % in the second quarter. Even though it is estimated that the Euro Zone would reach positive growth this year, some of its most important economies, such as France and Italy, continue to decelerate. In the case of Latin America, growth projections have been revised downward, standing at 1.4% for 2014 and 2.4% for 2015, due to the influence of negative growth exhibited by large economies such as Brazil, Venezuela and Argentina.
In the domestic sphere, the national accounts referenced to the year 2007, recently published, show a growth of the Dominican economy of 7.2% in the first half of 2014. Thus, the growth projection points to a rate higher than the estimated 5% in the Macroeconomic Framework for 2014. In addition, market interest rates have been reduced significantly, contributing to a greater growth of credit to the private sector in national currency, above 14.0% year-on-year. On the other hand, the fiscal policy is executed resulting in a lower deficit than that foreseen in the Budget, due to the fact that revenues grow above the budgeted, together with the moderation of the growth of public spending. On the other hand, the performance of the external sector continues to improve, projecting a deficit of around 4% of GDP by the end of the year. This trend would contribute to maintaining the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
