In its monetary policy meeting of September 2013, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep its Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) unchanged at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate takes into account the inflation projections that indicate that there are no significant deviations from the goals established in the Monetary Program, both for 2013 (5.0% ± 1.0%) and for 2014 (4.5% ± 1.0%). In August, the interannual inflation rate stood at 5.30%, accumulating 3.07% in the first eight months of this year. On a monthly basis, inflation reached 0.66% in August. In addition, core inflation, which is the price indicator that best reflects monetary conditions, decreased in interannual terms from 5.25% in July to 4.70% in August, below the central value of the target range for 2013.
In the external context, the Federal Reserve Bank of the United States of America maintained its policy of quantitative easing without change, which caused a decrease in the market interest rates in that economy, as well as the reversal of the flows of capital from emerging economies and the appreciation of the dollar. Indicators of expectations of the private sector in the Euro Zone show a perception that the economy of that bloc of countries could be emerging from recession in the coming months, driven by the growth of the largest economies such as Germany and France. In Latin America, according to the latest Consensus Forecast report, a 2.6% growth is projected for the current year, which implies a moderation compared to the average of recent years. Regarding international prices, a more stable behavior is observed in raw materials, although they still remain above their historical averages. In the domestic sphere, economic activity shows signs of improvement. Preliminary figures of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity point to a growth trend, consistent with the projection of 3.0% of the Monetary Program. An important determinant of this behavior is the evolution of credit to the private sector in national currency, which has presented year-on-year growth of around 14.5% in the month of September and is expected to close the year close to 12.0%. In the fiscal sector, the government maintains a public investment program in line with its budget plan, while carrying out an expenditure policy consistent with meeting its deficit target of 2.8% of GDP, for the closing of the year.
The decision to liberalize some RD $ 20,000 million of the legal reserve to the productive sectors has contributed notably to the dynamism of credit. In May-September, almost 80% of the amount to be liberalized had been placed (some RD $ 15.5 billion of the reserve), which has generated a multiplier effect in the financial system, reaching the total increase of private credit in national currency, more than RD $ 30,000 million, during that period. So far this year, since last December, private credit in national currency has grown around RD $ 38,000 million, a significant recovery compared to the same period last year, when there was a fall of approximately RD $ 5 billion. In interannual terms, September 2012-September 2013, private credit in national currency has expanded by RD $ 58,000 million, amount 4.3 times greater than the total placed a year before, between September 2011 and September 2012.

The liquidity of the financial system continues to grow according to the provisions of the Monetary Program. In year-on-year terms, in September, the bills and coins issued and the circulating medium (M1) grew around 8.5% and 9.0%, respectively, rates consistent with the expected behavior of nominal GDP for the year 2013.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
