At its monetary policy meeting in September 2015, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate was adopted after analyzing the balance of risks around inflation projections, market expectations, the national macroeconomic outlook and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. It was observed that in the month of August the interannual rate of inflation fell to 0.43%; in cumulative terms, inflation stood at 1.17% in the eighth month of the year. In the same way, core inflation, an indicator that reflects the monetary conditions of the economy, fell to 1.99% year-on-year. Forecasts continue to indicate that inflation would remain below the lower limit of the target set in the Monetary Program for 2015, gradually converging towards the center of the range of 4.0% ± 1.0% for 2016.

In the external environment, the behavior of the international economy continues to be determined by the improved performance of the industrialized countries, while the large emerging market economies are affected by the cycle of falling commodity prices. The gradual deceleration of the Chinese economy and the weakness of large emerging economies such as Russia and Brazil, induce the risks of global economic growth downward. Taking this into consideration, the Federal Reserve Bank left its monetary policy rate unchanged at last September's meeting, despite the notable expansion of production in the United States of America (USA). In the international exchange markets, the tendency to the appreciation of the dollar is maintained, while oil prices continue below the average of recent years. This behavior of international markets has reduced inflation in the United States and Europe, in contrast to what happened in the countries of Latin America that export raw materials, where exchange rate depreciation has generated higher inflation.
According to Consensus Forecast, the US economy would grow 2.5% in 2015, while the Eurozone would expand by 1.4% in the same period. Both in the United States and in the Euro Zone, inflation would remain low, standing at around 0.2% at the end of the year. In 2016, growth in the United States would increase to 2.7%, while in the Euro Zone it would be 1.7%. In the case of Latin America, consensus projects a contraction of 0.6% in 2015, recovering gradually in 2016 until reaching an expansion of 0.8% at the end of that year. This scenario would be determined by the projected contraction of the economies of Brazil (-2.6%) and Venezuela (-7.4%), as well as the low growth in Argentina (0.7%) and the slowdown in the growth of other major commodities exporters, such as this is the case of Chile (2.2%) and Peru (2.8%).

In the domestic sphere, Dominican economic activity continues to show a high dynamism in the short term, as a result of the notable improvement in macroeconomic fundamentals. In that sense, the cycle trend of the monthly indicator of economic activity (IMAE) presents a year-on-year growth rate of 6.2% in July, while loans to the private sector grew around 10.7% in the month of September. In the context of fiscal policy, the government has proposed a budget for 2016 in which the process of fiscal consolidation initiated three years ago is maintained by contemplating a primary surplus of around 0.7% of GDP and a deficit for the year equivalent to 2.3% of GDP. Likewise, the external sector presents a tendency to balance in the current account balance thanks to the drop in oil prices and the better performance of tourism, remittances and free zones. These positive results in the fiscal and external accounts, would facilitate the accumulation of reserves and the relative stability of the exchange market.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.