At its monetary policy meeting in September 2018, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged was based on a detailed analysis of the balance of risks around inflation projections, including the main national macroeconomic indicators, market expectations, the relevant international environment and medium-term forecasts. . In recent months, inflationary pressures have moderated. In that sense, the cumulative inflation to the month of August stood at 1.44%, which is why inter-annual inflation fell from 4.43% in the month of July to 3.87% in August, below the central value of the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0% established in the Monetary Program. Core inflation, linked to monetary conditions, fell to 2.59% year-on-year in August. In addition, the forecast system indicates that inflation would remain within the target range in the two-year monetary policy horizon.

In the external context, the growth prospects of the world economy continue at around 3.3% during 2018 and 3.1% in 2019. According to Consensus Forecast, the United States of America (USA) would grow 2.9% in 2018 and 2.6% in 2019. Given the dynamics of expansion and full employment of that economy, the monetary policy in the US continues with the process of normalization, gradually withdrawing the monetary stimulus in force since the global financial crisis. Under these conditions, market interest rates tend to rise and the US dollar appreciates.

On the other hand, the economy of the set of countries that make up the Euro Zone (ZE) would grow 2.1% in 2018 and 1.8% in 2019, while Japan would expand by 1.1% in 2018 and 1.2% in 2019, according to the Consensus Forecast. Given that inflationary pressures remain moderate in these countries, the monetary policy stance would remain expansive in the coming months.
The economic situation for emerging economies becomes less favorable as the perception of risk increases in countries such as Argentina, Turkey, South Africa and Brazil, among others, which is manifested in a reversal of capital flows in those economies with weak macroeconomic fundamentals. In contrast, the larger emerging economies such as India and China continue with significant dynamism. In that sense, India would expand 7.4% in 2018 and 7.8% in 2019, while China would grow by 6.6% and 6.4%, during those years.

The countries of Latin America (AL), with the exception of Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua, present a positive growth outlook this year, with an expansion of 1.9% in 2018 and 2.6% in 2019 in the region.

With regard to primary goods, uncertainty continues to be observed regarding international oil prices attributed to a combination of factors that include greater demand in the face of the momentum of the world economy, supply restrictions and geopolitical factors.

Domestically, the Dominican economy continues to evolve favorably, with strong macroeconomic fundamentals reflected in high growth and low inflation, as well as consolidation processes in fiscal and external accounts. After recent monetary measures, credit to the private sector in national currency has moderated its year-on-year expansion around 12.5% ??as of September. According to the Central Bank forecasting system, economic activity maintains its dynamism with year-on-year growth in 2018 in the range of 6.0% - 6.5%, while inflation would be around the lower limit of the target at the end of this year . For the next year, economic growth is projected to converge to its potential and inflation to approach the center of the target.
On the fiscal policy side, a moderation in public spending, together with tax revenues in line with the budget, has led to a deficit of the Non-Financial Public Sector of just 0.2% of GDP as of July. In the external sector, the momentum of foreign currency generating activities has substantially contributed to moderate the impact of higher oil prices on the Dominican economy and international reserves maintain levels equivalent to more than four months of imports, which favors stability relative of the exchange market.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve the inflation target and maintain macroeconomic stability. In this sense, the institution will continue monitoring the evolution of the world and national economy, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.