At its September 2016 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep its monetary policy rate (MPR) at 5.0% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate takes into account the balance of risks around inflation projections, market expectations, the domestic macroeconomic context, as well as the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. In August, the interannual rate of inflation stood at 1.47%, while cumulative inflation reached 0.31% at the end of that month. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, related to monetary conditions, amounted to 1.73 percent.

In the external context, the Federal Reserve Bank of the United States of America (FED) decided to maintain its TPM at its September meeting without change. However, within the FED, the arguments in favor of an increase in rates this year have been strengthened, indicating that the normalization of monetary policy could be resumed in the coming months. According to the Consensus Forecast's vision of the industrialized economies, the United States would be growing 1.5% in 2016, showing greater dynamism in 2017 with an expansion of the product around 2.3% year-on-year. The Euro Zone (ZE), on the other hand, would expand at interannual rates of around 1.5% in 2016, driven by the growth of economies such as Germany (1.8%) and Spain (3.0%). For 2017, incorporating the impact of Brexit on the economies of the region, the growth of the EZ would moderate to 1.3% year-on-year.
In Latin America, Consensus Forecast corrected its growth projections for the current year from -0.5% year-on-year in August to -0.3% year-to-year in September. Despite this small improvement in projections, at least four major economies in the region would remain in recession: Venezuela (-10.1%); Brazil (-3.2%); Ecuador (-2.3%); and Argentina (-1.5%). An important recovery of Latin America is expected in 2017 with a growth of around 2.2%, leaving only the Venezuelan economy in recession (-2.6%). The large countries of the region would benefit from a moderate increase in commodity prices next year, while the smaller economies, such as those of Central America and the Caribbean, would face more favorable conditions for their exports, given the greater dynamism of United States, its main commercial partner.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand are evolving positively. In January-August, the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) shows real growth around 6.8% year-on-year, which indicates that the economy would be growing this year above its potential. Credit to the private sector in national currency shows a year-on-year growth rate of around 12.6% in September and continues to grow above the nominal product expansion. In the fiscal sector, public spending has slowed down in the second half of the year and it is expected, according to the most recent budget update, that at the end of 2016 the deficit will approach 2.7% of GDP and for 2017 it stood at 2.3% of GDP. On the side of external sector accounts, the current account deficit would end 2016 with a deficit of around 1.7% of GDP. Under this scenario, conditions are favorable for accumulating international reserves and maintaining the relative stability of the foreign exchange market.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to continue conducting monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to stability of prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.