At its monetary policy meeting in October 2017, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.25% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate was made after reviewing the balance of risks around the inflation forecasts, the evolution of the main national macroeconomic indicators, the international environment relevant to the Dominican economy, market expectations and the projections of that set of variables. Monthly inflation was 0.64% in September, while the accumulated rate at the ninth month of the year stood at 2.42%. Likewise, year-on-year inflation reached 3.80%, close to the center of the Monetary Program's target range. Additionally, core inflation, related to monetary conditions, was 2.29% year-on-year. The projections indicate that, at the end of this year, inflation would be around the lower limit of the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0%.

In the external context, the growth of the world economy has presented a performance better than expected in the second half of the year, attributed to the expansion of production in advanced economies, while inflationary pressures remain contained. According to Consensus Forecast, the United States of America (USA) would grow 2.2% in 2017 and 2.4% in 2018, while the product of the Euro Zone (ZE) would expand by 2.2% and 1.8%, during those years. The inflationary pressures of the developed economies remain relatively low, projecting 2.0% for the US in 2017 and 2018, as well as inflation rates of 1.5% in 2017 and 1.3% in 2018 for the ZE.

In Latin America there is a gradual economic recovery, with the exception of Venezuela. Consensus Forecast projections indicate that the region's economy would grow 1.7% in 2017 and 2.6% in 2018, driven by more favorable terms of trade. The dynamism of the advanced economies together with the better expected performance in the emerging economies would have a positive impact on the global economic activity that, according to the International Monetary Fund, would grow 3.1% in 2017 and 2018.
International prices of primary goods have increased in recent months. The price of a barrel of West Texas oil (WTI) reached US $ 54 at the end of October. However, it is expected that by the end of the year it will be around US $ 52.0 a barrel, below the price observed at the end of 2016. International financial conditions remain favorable for emerging economies in the short term due to the abundant liquidity Worldwide.

Domestically, economic activity maintains positive prospects registering a growth of 4.0% in the period January-August 2017. The decrease in monetary policy rates, together with the measure to reduce the legal reserve of 2.2 percentage points, have had a multiplying effect on loans to the private sector in national currency, which have increased by almost RD $ 24 billion pesos, in less than three months.

Recently, the Monetary Board eliminated the sectorization in the use of legal reserve, so that the RD $ 11,515 million pending placement of the resources of the legal reserve, could be lent to any sector that demands it. This measure, together with the entry into force of some aspects of the Asset Evaluation Regulation (REA), particularly for the benefit of sectors such as agriculture and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MIPYMES), will have a favorable impact on credit, employment and the growth of the economy. At the end of October, private credit in national currency grew around 10% year-on-year.
With regard to fiscal policy, the Government maintains its commitment to the deficit target established in the National Budget, while strengthening the coordination of monetary and fiscal policies. On the other hand, the external sector shows a positive behavior, contributing to the increase in foreign exchange earnings and creating a favorable environment for the relative stability of the foreign exchange market and for the accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and maintain macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
