At its monetary policy meeting in October 2016, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to increase its monetary policy rate (MPR) by 50 basis points, from 5.00% per annum to 5.50% per annum, effective November 1. According to the BCRD's short-term liquidity management scheme, the rate of paid deposits (overnight) is increased from 3.50% to 4.00% per annum and the rate of expansion facilities (repos) increases from 6.50% to 7.00% annual.

The decision regarding the reference rate has a preventive character and seeks to generate certainty for economic agents. This measure takes into account the balance of risks around inflation projections, market expectations, the domestic macroeconomic context, as well as the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy; in particular the upward expectations of Federal Reserve interest rates (FED), the recent trend of higher international oil prices and the uncertainty that the electoral process of the United States of America (USA) has generated in international markets, among others. In September, the interannual inflation rate stood at 1.35%, while cumulative inflation reached 0.35% at the end of that month. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, related to monetary conditions, amounted to 1.78 percent.

Although inflation has remained persistently below the target range and the economy has grown at rates above its potential, this behavior is due to the positive supply shock, mainly associated with the fall in international oil prices. However, during the last months there has been a gradual increase in oil prices, while projections indicate that this process would continue in the policy horizon. In that sense, the inflation projections for 2017 indicate a moderate upward trend, which could imply potential risks of deviations from the inflation target of 4.0% ± 1.0%. In the same way, higher oil prices would have an impact on the projected result of the Current Account. Likewise, according to data from the Macroeconomic Expectations Survey, we observe an upward behavior of market inflation expectations by economic agents.
In the external environment, the United States of America recorded a growth rate of 1.5% year-on-year in the third quarter of the year, exceeding market expectations for that period. This result strengthens the probability that the Federal Reserve will resume the normalization of its monetary policy rate in the coming months. According to the most recent information from the Consensus Forecast, the US would grow 1.5% in 2016 and 2.2% in 2017. It should be noted that in the international financial markets there has been some uncertainty regarding the US electoral process and its possible impact on external liquidity conditions. . Given the electoral uncertainty in the US, some emerging economies, such as Mexico, have presented volatility in their exchange markets.

On the other hand, the Euro Zone (ZE) would expand at interannual rates of around 1.6% in the current year, supported by the performance of Germany (1.8%) and Spain (3.1%). For 2017, this region would experience a moderate slowdown, growing 1.3% year-on-year, probably influenced by the impact of Brexit.

In Latin America, Consensus Forecast expects a contraction of economic activity of -0.3% this year, slightly better than the previous projections of -0.5% for the region. The low projected growth for Latin America this year is explained by significant recessions in countries such as: Venezuela (-10.3%); Brazil (-3.2%); Ecuador (-2.0%); and Argentina (-1.6%). It is important to point out that contrary to what happens with these commodity exporting economies, the economies of Central America, oil importers, have kept growing with low levels of inflation in 2016. By 2017, Latin America would grow around 2.1%, being Venezuela (-3.5%) the only economy that would remain in recession.
In the domestic sphere, economic activity continues to expand at a rate above its potential. In January-September, the real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew 6.9% year-on-year and current forecasts indicate that economic growth at the end of the year would be 6.5%, the highest in Latin America for the third consecutive year. To the extent that the positive supply shock dissipates, that is to say that oil prices present an upward trajectory, real GDP would converge to its potential level in the policy horizon. In the financial sector, credit to the private sector in national currency expanded at a rate of around 12.0% year-on-year in October, growing above nominal GDP and beyond that contemplated in the Monetary Program.

In the fiscal sector, public spending has decelerated noticeably in the second half of the year and it is expected that by the end of 2016 the deficit will approach what was stipulated in the latest projection of the National Budget, consolidating around 2.3% of GDP for Next year. On the side of external sector accounts, the current account deficit would end 2016 with a deficit close to 1.7% of GDP. This context of solid macroeconomic fundamentals, together with the Central Bank's preventive decision to increase its Monetary Policy Rate, contributes to maintain propitious conditions to accumulate international reserves and promote the relative stability of the exchange market.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to continue conducting monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target and maintaining macroeconomic stability, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures in the face of risks regarding price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
