At its monetary policy meeting for the month of December 2015, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate is based on a thorough analysis of the international and domestic environment, relevant to the Dominican economy, as well as the balance of risks around inflation forecasts and market expectations. It was observed that to the month of November, in accumulated terms, inflation reached 2.25%. Likewise, the interannual rate of inflation amounted to 1.54% that month. Additionally, core inflation, which reflects the monetary conditions of the economy, fell to 1.80% year-on-year. Inflation would end, at the end of the year, around the lower limit of the target established in the Monetary Program for 2015, gradually converging towards the center of the range of 4.0% ± 1.0% in 2016.

In the external context, the Federal Reserve (FED) began the process of normalizing its monetary policy, with an increase of 25 basis points in its federal funds rate. According to the FED, this increase should not have harmful effects on the performance of the US economy, so the monetary institution maintains its growth prospects around its potential and inflation close to 2.0% in the medium term. The unemployment rate in the United States of America (USA) would remain around the level considered of full employment. A point to be highlighted is that the FED's decision would help to increase international interest rates and maintain the appreciation of the dollar in global capital markets.
Regarding the most recent economic projections of the Consensus Forecast (CFC), the growth of the world economy stands out at around 2.6% in 2015, improving to 2.8% in 2016. World growth would be led by the expansion of the industrialized countries , while the deceleration in emerging economies continues. In that sense, the US would register an expansion of 2.5% in both 2015 and 2016, while the Euro Zone (ZE) would continue consolidating its recovery with growth rates of 1.5% in 2015 and 1.7% in 2016. It is expected that Inflation tends to approach 2.0% in both the US and the ZE, while unemployment continues to fall.

On the other hand, the macroeconomic conditions of the emerging economies remain weak, while the outlook points to a slight improvement in 2016. In this line, Consensus Forecast estimates that Latin America would contract by 1.0% in 2015 and fall 0.1% in 2016. This result would be influenced by the evolution of Venezuela and Brazil, which would remain in recession until 2016, as well as by the moderation of growth in the net exporting economies of raw materials in the region. At the same time, in international markets, the fall in oil prices has worsened, which have already fallen to minimum levels since 2009, while the appreciation of the dollar continues.

Domestically, economic activity continues to grow above its potential. The most recent information from the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) trend-cycle suggests that the economy is above the productive capacity of the economy, indicating that the current forecasts of the International Monetary Fund that contemplate a real GDP growth would be fulfilled in the range of 6.5% -7.0% for the close of this year. In the financial sector, private loans in national currency show double-digit growth, exceeding nominal product growth.
The external accounts of the economy continue to improve in an environment of low oil prices and good performance in revenues from tourism, remittances and exports from free zones. It is expected that by the end of 2015, the current account deficit will be around 2.0% of GDP, a situation that would remain for next year. With regard to fiscal policy, a primary surplus would be obtained in the current year that should be maintained next year, according to the 2016 Budget. These positive results in the external and fiscal accounts would facilitate the accumulation of reserves and the relative stability of the exchange market.

The Central Bank confirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against possible risks to stability of prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
