At its monetary policy meeting in January 2015, the Central Bank decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate (MPR) unchanged at 6.25% per annum, thus continuing with the neutral position it has maintained since August 2013.

The decision on the benchmark interest rate was adopted after a thorough analysis of the risk balance around inflation projections, as well as the state of the economy based on its main indicators, market expectations and the international environment relevant. Last December, the year-on-year rate of inflation closed at 1.58%, while core inflation, related to the monetary conditions of the economy, was 2.97%. The inflation target from 2015 is 4.0% ± 1%, according to the Monetary Program under the Inflation Targets, published at the end of last year. In the policy horizon, projections suggest that inflation would converge to the medium-term goal, while the economy would continue to grow close to its potential.

In the international environment, the outlook for the growth of the world economy for 2015 remains moderate due to the projected trajectory for the Euro Zone, Japan and other industrialized economies. The United States of America shows a flattering outlook regarding the rate of expansion of its production due to the good performance of investment and private consumption. However, at its first monetary policy meeting in 2015, the Federal Reserve Bank maintained its MPR in the 0% -0.25% range, indicating that it would leave it at least until the third quarter of the year. In terms of emerging economies, Consensus Forecast has adjusted the growth projections for Asia and Latin America to 4.7% and 1.1%, respectively.
On the other hand, the downward trend in the prices of the main primary goods (commodities), particularly fuels and industrial metals, continues, while international financial conditions have become more restrictive for emerging economies. As a result of the application of more expansive monetary policies in the Euro Zone, Japan and other economies with problems of economic growth, the US dollar has tended to appreciate worldwide and long-term interest rates in industrialized countries have been reduced. .

In the domestic sphere, economic activity grew 7.1% in 2014 and it is expected that in 2015 it will continue to register an expansion close to its potential. In January, credit to the private sector in local currency was 15.6% in year-on-year terms, while total credit to the private sector, including foreign currency financing, would close this month with growth above 18.0% over the year. previous. In the fiscal part, adjustments continue and it is expected that by 2015 the Central Government deficit would be 2.4% of GDP. This process of fiscal consolidation would help strengthen the sustainability of the debt, which has improved with the operation of handling liabilities recently made by the Dominican Government with the Venezuelan company PDVSA. Additionally, external accounts will continue to strengthen in the current year and a current account deficit is projected for the end of 2015 in the range of 1.9% -2.1% of GDP. The continuous strengthening of the macroeconomic foundations of the Dominican economy facilitates the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate and a greater accumulation of international reserves.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
