The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy meeting of January 2012, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Rate unchanged at 6.75% per annum. At the same time, it decided to leave the Lombard Interest Rate unchanged at 9.0% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate is based on the fact that no deviations are foreseen for the inflation projection with respect to the target and for the prospects of the main determinants of inflation. For 2012, the Monetary Board, under the new explicit inflation targeting (EMI) scheme, approved a goal of 5.5% ± 1% for this indicator. In December 2011, monthly inflation was 0.1%, while the year-on-year rate reached 7.8%. In addition, the interannual core inflation rose to 5.2% at the end of the year.

In the external context, both the IMF and the Consensus Forecast maintain their perspectives of moderation in the growth of the world economy. The projections suggest that the United States would continue its path of incipient recovery, while Europe could be entering recession in 2012. The solution of economic policy in the eurozone seems to confront a dilemma between fiscal austerity and economic growth, which makes it difficult to correct the process of debt crisis and fiscal sustainability of that monetary union, as discussed at the recent World Economic Forum in Davos. However, it is important to note that the European Union recently approved a fiscal rule that would allow the sustainability of public accounts in the long term.
On the other hand, forecasts show that emerging economies would be slowing down while international financial conditions remain restricted. In that sense, China would be growing below the average of recent years, while the growth forecasts for Latin America are corrected to the downside. The prices of raw materials remain high amid geopolitical tensions in the Middle East.

In the domestic sphere, private credit, economic activity and inflation evolve in accordance with the projections of the recent Monetary Policy Report. Credit to the private sector continues to expand at a rate close to projected nominal GDP, indicating that domestic demand preserves its growth. At the same time, the forecasts point to a convergence of interannual inflation to the target during the first quarter of 2012, which indicates that even in the middle of an electoral cycle, price stability and the continuity of macroeconomic policies would be maintained, creating a environment of certainty that facilitates the decision making of private economic agents.
The Central Bank will continue to monitor the evolution of the global and domestic economy in order to react in a timely manner to risks regarding price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
