The Monetary Board, through the second resolution of December 20, 2012, decided to modify the interest rate corridor, formed by the rates of short-term remunerated deposits (overnight) and Lombarda, with which it had operated its policy during the last years. In this sense, it established that from now on the Monetary Policy Interest Rate of the Central Bank (TPM) will be exclusively a Reference Rate of the 1-Day Liquidity Operations performed by the institution, instead of the rate of paid deposits of the Central Bank. short term, which had fulfilled that role since 2005.

In the external context, economic activity in the United States of America recorded a slight contraction of 0.1% in the fourth quarter of 2012, closing the year at 2.2%. For 2013, an expansion of 2.0% is expected according to the Economic Consensus (Consensus Forecast). The fiscal risks of the United States have moderated temporarily, while in the Euro Zone recessive conditions persist, estimating a fall of 0.4% by the end of 2012. Additionally, there is a loss of dynamism in important countries in the area, particularly Germany and France. On the other hand, the Economic Consensus predicts that Latin America's growth would be 2.7% in 2012. In most of the countries of the region, monetary policy maintains a neutral stance. International financial conditions have improved relatively and prices of primary goods remain above their historical levels. 

In the domestic sphere, production and domestic demand behave as predicted in the most recent Monetary Policy Report. Economic activity grew in 2012 at around 4.0%, higher than the average for Latin America. This growth indicates a moderate recovery in the second half of the year, but staying below its long-term trend. During this year, production will remain below its potential, recovering its path from next year, supported by an improvement in private consumption and investment, as total credit is recovered and economic activity is boosted.Regarding the possible impact on domestic prices, stemming from the implementation of the fiscal reform, the Central Bank estimates that its effect would have a transitory and one-off nature, so that inflation would remain around the target of this year.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to react timely to risks on price stability and good functioning of the financial and payment systems.
