At its monetary policy meeting in January 2014, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to maintain the reference rate at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the monetary policy rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as market expectations. The year-on-year inflation rate closed at 3.88% in December, decreasing for the fourth consecutive month. This result was slightly below the lower limit of the target range of 5.0% ± 1.0%. Additionally, the interannual core inflation, which is associated with inflationary pressures of monetary origin, fell to 4.42%, closing below the central value of the target.

In the external context, the conditions of the world economy are characterized by a process of gradual recovery, based on a better performance of the developed countries, particularly the United States of America (USA), which grew 3.2% in the last quarter of 2013 and 1.9% throughout the year, reducing the unemployment rate from 7.9% in December 2012 to 6.7% in December 2013. According to Consensus Forecast, the US economy would grow 2.8% in 2014, while the Euro Zone would expand by 1.0%, leaving behind the recessive stage of the economic cycle.

The gradual reduction of the monetary stimulus by the Federal Reserve (FED), reducing its monthly purchases of financial assets to inject liquidity in US $ 20,000 million, would be restricting international financial conditions and provoking capital returns to the industrialized economies. In this context, some of the larger emerging economies such as Argentina, Brazil, India, Turkey and South Africa, mostly exporters of commodities, have experienced exchange rate pressures, which has led their central banks to tighten monetary policy stance through increases in interest rates, liquidity restrictions and interventions in the foreign exchange market, to face possible effects on inflation.
It is important to point out that given the greater growth of production and employment in the US, there is a consensus among the governors of the FED that there will be no increases in the reference rate of monetary policy, at least until 2015. In that sense, the The gradual withdrawal of the monetary stimulus and the temporary volatility it has caused in the international capital markets, would have minimal effects on the financial and exchange markets of the smaller economies, with good macroeconomic fundamentals and without active participation in the global financial markets, as it is the case of the Dominican Republic. However, the greater dynamism in the economic activity of the United States, the country's main trading partner, would have a positive impact on Dominican economic growth, through exports and the flow of remittances, which would increase the supply of foreign currency in the country. Dominican exchange market, facilitating the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate.

Additionally, economic activity and domestic demand show remarkable dynamism as of the fourth quarter of 2013, growing by 7.2%, driven during this period by exports, investment and private consumption. Credit to the private sector in national currency continues to expand at a rate above the nominal product, while improving prospects for activities related to foreign trade. In this sense, it is expected that in this year the current account deficit of the balance of payments would continue to be corrected, which together with the strengthening of public finances, would contribute to improving the macroeconomic performance of the Dominican Republic and its perception of country risk.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
