At its monetary policy meeting for the month of January 2016, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate has been made after an examination of the international environment relevant to the Dominican economy, as well as the domestic context taking into account the balance of risks around inflation projections and market expectations. It was observed that, as of December 2015, the interannual inflation rate reached 2.34%, below the lower limit of the goal established in the Monetary Program. At the same time, core inflation, which reflects the monetary conditions of the economy, amounted to 1.82% last year. Inflation is expected to converge gradually towards the center of the target range of 4.0% ± 1.0% in the policy horizon.

Externally, the most recent World Economic Outlook (WEO) of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reduced the projections for world growth from 3.6% to 3.4% for 2016, due to the problems of the main emerging economies, particularly the emerging economies. net exporters of primary goods. After the increase of its monetary policy rate (MPR) in the month of December, the Federal Reserve Bank (FED) decided to keep its MPR unchanged in January, faced with greater uncertainty in the international financial markets. The slowdown in China and the recession in several of the leading emerging economies have pushed up the country risk premiums of these economies, while the US dollar has appreciated and the price of oil and stock indicators have declined.
The most recent forecasts of the Consensus Forecast (CFC) highlight that world growth would be led by the expansion of the industrialized countries. In that sense, the United States of America (USA) would register an expansion of 2.4% in 2016 and 2.5% in 2017, while the Euro Zone (ZE) would continue consolidating its recovery with growth rates of 1.7% in 2016 and 2017. Inflation is expected to approach 2.0% in both the US and the ZE, while unemployment continues to fall.

The macroeconomic conditions of emerging economies remain weak. The outlook points to a slight improvement in 2016. Latin America would present a growth of 0.3% in 2016, reaching a recovery in 2017, with an expansion of 2.3%. This result would be influenced by the evolution of Venezuela and Brazil, which would remain in recession until 2016, as well as by the moderation of growth in the net exporting economies of raw materials in the region.

Domestically, economic activity continues to grow above its potential. Preliminary data show a GDP expansion rate of 7.0% in 2015. In the financial sector, private loans in local currency show a year-on-year growth of close to 12%, exceeding nominal product growth.
The external accounts of the Dominican economy continue to improve in an environment of low oil prices and good performance in tourism revenues, remittances and exports from free zones. It is expected that by 2016, the current account deficit will remain around 2.0% of GDP. With regard to fiscal policy, the 2016 Budget contemplates maintaining discipline within the consolidation and sustainability efforts of public accounts. The adequate behavior of external and fiscal accounts in 2016 would facilitate the accumulation of reserves and the relative stability of the foreign exchange market.

The Central Bank confirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against possible risks to stability of prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
