BCRD maintains its monetary policy rate at 4.50% per year
At its January 2020 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 4.50% per annum.

The benchmark decision is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. December's monthly inflation was 0.20%, while year-on-year inflation at the end of 2019 stood at 3.66%, below the focus of the target of 4.0% to 1.0%. Underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, stood at 2.25% in December. Going forward, both the inflation expectations of economic analysts and the BCRD forecasting system, indicate that inflation would remain around the core value of the target range by 2020.

In the international environment, uncertainty factors are still persisting, associated with socio-political tensions in various regions of the world and trade disputes between major economies, which have influenced a slowdown in the global economy. More recently, volatility in international financial markets has increased as a result of the potential impact that coronavirus can have on the Chinese economy and on global growth. Indeed, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates that the global economy would expand by 2.9% in 2019, the lowest rate in a decade, and would recover slightly to 3.3% by 2020. On the other hand, Consensus Forecasts, which brings together leading analyst firms that make international projections, maintains the forecast of moderate global growth of 2.5% for 2019 and 2020.

Economic activity in the United States of America has gradually slowed from 2.9% growth in 2018 to 2.3% in 2019, while IMF projections indicate a 2.0% expansion in 2020 for the world's main economy. In this context and with low inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve maintains an accommodative monetary stance, continuing liquidity provision programmes to the financial system through repurchase agreements (REPOS) and Treasury bill purchases on the secondary market, with the aim of reducing short-term interest rates. Importantly, the Fed and market analysts do not anticipate adjustments to the benchmark interest rate this year. As for the Euro Area, economic growth has deteriorated from 1.9% in 2018 to 1.2% at the end of 2019, projecting 1.3% by 2020. 

 The slowdown in this bloc of countries has been influenced by the weak performance of the industrial sector in its major economies and the slowdown in international trade. Considering the absence of inflationary pressures, the European Central Bank continues to implement a package of expansionary measures, including a negative interest rate for short-term deposits of financial institutions, the liquidity provision programme for the channelling of credit to the private sector, and the purchase of sovereign bonds on the secondary market.

On the other hand, in Latin America, the deterioration of economic activity has been accentuated as a result of socio-political conflicts in several of the countries of the region. Thus, the IMF estimates regional growth of just 0.1% for 2019 and a recovery of 1.6% in 2020. The region's economic slowdown during 2019 has been influenced by negative growth rates in Mexico, Venezuela, Nicaragua, Argentina, Ecuador and Paraguay, as well as the modest expansion of Brazil and the negative impact of social demonstrations in Chile, Bolivia and Colombia.

In terms of raw materials, the price of Texas' intermediate oil averaged $58 during the month of January, conditioned by geopolitical conflicts in crude oil-producing countries and by the prospects for lower global demand. On the other hand, the price of gold has remained at high levels, ranking above $1,550 per troy ounce during the month of January, being used as a haven of value in an environment of high uncertainty. This behaviour of oil and gold prices favors the Dominican Republic's terms of trade and benefits the external sector of the economy.

In the domestic context, the economy continues to react favourably to monetary easing measures, which have boosted domestic demand through increased consumption and private investment from the second half of 2019. Indeed, economic activity showed significant dynamism over the past December as year-on-year growth of 6.7% was recorded. Thus, gross domestic product (GDP) growth reached 5.1% in 2019, consistent with the potential growth of the economy.

The expansionary monetary measures implemented from June 2019, through the reduction of 100 basis points of the monetary policy rate and the release of more than RD$34 billion of legal lace resources to the productive sectors, contributed to the increase of private credit in national currency , while total private loans, which include domestic and foreign currency, increased by more than RD$127 billion in this period. This dynamism of private credit has been maintained at the beginning of this year, with an expansion rate of more than 12% year-on-year at the end of January. Favourable monetary conditions are expected to continue to support the dynamism of domestic demand, projecting economic growth of around 5.0% - 5.3% during 2020.

In the external sector, the Balance of Payments current account had a deficit of 1.4% of GDP, similar to that of 2018 and lower than the average in the last ten years. In terms of foreign exchange-generating activities, foreign direct investment reached US$3,012.8 million during 2019 and remittances received amounted to US$7,087.2 million, offsetting the recent moderation of tourism which, despite being affected by the spread of negative news, generated revenue of US$7,468.1 million. On the other hand, the process of consolidation of public finances has been continued, with a deficit of 2.3% of GDP and a primary surplus of 0.6% of GDP at the end of 2019.

In this complex international environment, the Dominican Republic has managed to strengthen its macroeconomic fundamentals, maintaining relative exchange rate stability and continuing the process of accumulation of International Reserves, which ended 2019 at US$8,781.8 million, its highest historical level for a year-end closing, equivalent to 4.9 months of import coverage and approximately 10% of GDP.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this sense, the institution will continue to monitor the moderation of the world economy and factors of uncertainty both externally and internally and its impact on aggregate demand, being prepared to continue to react in a timely manner to factors that may generate deviations from the inflation target and affect Dominican economic growth.

