At its monetary policy meeting for the month of February 2015, the Central Bank decided to maintain its monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 6.25% per annum.

The decision on the reference interest rate was taken based on the analysis of the perspectives and the balance of risks around the inflation projections. In that sense, although the year-on-year inflation for January was only 1.16%, below the target of this year of 4.0% ± 1%, the projections continue indicating that in the monetary policy horizon, inflation would converge to your medium-term goal. Additionally, the Central Bank took into account in its decision the main national macroeconomic indicators and market expectations, as well as the relevant international environment. It is important to note that core inflation, related to the monetary conditions of the economy, was 2.91%, a rate that corresponds to the Monetary Program.

In the external sphere, the monetary policy implemented by the main developed economies would remain expansive, at least until the last quarter of the year. The United States of America (USA) is expected to continue consolidating its recovery, projected a growth of 3.2% in 2015, according to Consensus Forecast. If this situation were maintained, the country's commercial exchange with the United States would benefit. Likewise, the Euro Zone and Japan maintain monetary stimuli with the aim of boosting economic growth in the short term. While the Euro Zone would register an expansion rate of 1.2%, Japan would grow around 1.3%. On the other hand, Latin America shows a moderate growth scenario with forecasts of around 1.3% for 2015, a slightly higher increase than that reached in the previous year.

In international capital markets, financial conditions have not presented major changes in the last month and a gradual improvement in liquidity is expected, which would facilitate the flow of capital to emerging economies. On the other hand, the US dollar has strengthened in the last year to the extent that the market recognizes the best performance of the US economy compared to other developed economies. The prices of basic goods continue below their levels of the last five years, and in the case of oil, according to the International Energy Agency (EIA), the price would be on average at US $ 55 a barrel in 2015. This forecast It would favor the behavior of the fiscal accounts and the current account of the balance of payments. Based on this average oil price, the country could generate a saving of around US $ 1,550 million in the oil bill.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity maintained its dynamism, growing 7.3% in 2014. In February, the annual growth rate of credit to the private sector in national currency was 14.5%, while total credit to the private sector, including financing in foreign currency, it would expand by around 18.0%, with respect to the same month of the previous year. In the area of ??fiscal policy, budget execution remains oriented toward meeting the Central Government's deficit target, around 2.4% of GDP in 2015. Additionally, external accounts point towards a current account deficit around to 2.0% of GDP for the end of the year, facilitating the maintenance of relative stability in the foreign exchange market and a greater accumulation of international reserves.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
