The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of February 2016, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (MPR) unchanged at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference interest rate takes into account that the forecast models indicate that inflation would converge to the center of the target of 4.0% ± 1.0%, in the monetary policy horizon. Likewise, market expectations are located around the inflation target. It was observed that in the month of January, the interannual inflation rate stood at 2.53%, while the core interannual inflation, which reflects the monetary conditions, decreased to 1.78%. The balance of risks around the inflation projections is balanced, while the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy tends to be favorable, with low oil prices and growth of the main trading partner, the United States of America (USA).

In the external context, the World Economy would grow 2.6% in 2016 and 2.9% in 2017, driven mainly by the behavior of the industrialized economies. According to the Consensus Forecast, the US would grow 2.2% in 2016 and 2.4% in 2017, while the Euro Zone would expand its economic activity by 1.6% and 1.7%, respectively, during those years. Latin America, as a whole, would present a fall in real economic activity of -0.1% in 2016, due to the recession experienced by some of the largest economies in the region such as Venezuela (-6.3%), Brazil (-3.1% ), Argentina (-0.1%) and Ecuador (-0.1%). Likewise, the growth of other important countries in the region would be positive, but it would remain below 3.0%, such as Mexico (2.7%), Chile (2.0%), Colombia (2.5%) and Uruguay (1.9%). ). For 2017 a moderate recovery is expected in the Latin American Region when reaching its Gross Domestic Product, a real expansion of around 2.1%.
Conditions in international stock markets continue to show a high degree of volatility, while capital flows leave emerging economies to more secure destinations. Risk premia for many net exporters of primary goods have increased, mainly due to lower prices of petroleum, industrial metals and some foods. The fall in commodity prices has generated significant depreciations in the currencies of this group of countries, causing deviations in the inflation targets and, consequently, leading several central banks to increase interest rates, contrary to the position of politics that predominates in some advanced economies. One point to note is that in the international exchange markets the appreciation of the dollar against the euro is maintained, albeit more moderately, while long-term interest rates have tended to decrease in advanced countries.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity evolves positively in the short term, growing at a real rate above potential production. Private loans in national currency show year-on-year growth close to 12% at the end of February, exceeding nominal product growth. The macroeconomic fundamentals of the Dominican economy remain strong, reflected in a low current account deficit of around 2.0% of GDP and a moderate estimate of the budget deficit of around 2.3% of GDP for 2016. This behavior of fiscal policy favors the sustainability of public accounts. In a context of solid macroeconomic fundamentals like the current one, it facilitates the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate, as well as the accumulation of international reserves in an amount much higher than the historical average.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to react timely to risks on price stability and good functioning of the financial and payment systems.
