The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of February 2013, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (MPR) unchanged at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference interest rate takes into account that the forecast models indicate that in the monetary policy horizon, inflation would be within the goal of 5.0% ± 1 percentage point in 2013 and 4.5% ± 1 point. percentage in 2014. Likewise, market expectations are close to the inflation target. In January, year-on-year inflation reached 4.76%, as a result of the impact of the fiscal reform that caused a monthly inflation of 1.26%.

In the external context, economic activity in the United States of America (USA) continued to grow at a moderate pace, expanding 2.2% in 2012, while in the Euro Zone (ZE) the recession persisted at the end of the year with a fall in GDP. of 0.5%. However, for 2013, the Consensus Forecast projects a slightly lower growth of 1.9% in the US, as well as a moderation of the recession in the ZE, foreseeing a fall of 0.2% for the current year.
Although fiscal risks have moderated in the US, political pressures persist related to cuts in public spending that could affect economic performance. In the European Union there is still no definitive solution to the fiscal and debt crisis and, with the exception of Germany, the main economies are experiencing recessive or zero growth conditions. On the other hand, international financial markets have better liquidity conditions, which could facilitate the flow of capital to emerging economies. Although the prices of most primary goods experienced a decrease in 2012, they still remain above their historical levels.

In the domestic sphere, economic growth in 2012 was 3.9%, higher than the Latin American average of 3.1%, according to ECLAC. This growth was in line with the forecast in the macroeconomic framework. Credit to the private sector in national currency continues showing a recovery and projections seem to indicate that by the end of the year the financing would be growing above the nominal product. Greater credit would allow a faster recovery of consumption and private investment, helping production expand to levels closer to its potential capacity.
El Banco Central reafirma su compromiso de conducir la política monetaria al logro de su meta de inflación, a la vez que seguirá monitoreando la evolución de la economía mundial y la coyuntura doméstica, a fin de reaccionar oportunamente ante riesgos sobre la estabilidad de precios y el buen funcionamiento de los sistemas financiero y de pagos.
