BCRD maintains its monetary policy rate at 4.50% per year
At its monetary policy meeting in February 2020, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 4.50% per annum.

The benchmark decision is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. January's monthly inflation was 0.33%, while underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, stood at 2.41% in January. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from January 2019 to January 2020, stood at 4.17%, remaining within the target range of 4.0% to 1.0%. Going forward, both the inflation expectations of economic analysts and the BCRD forecasting system, indicate that inflation would remain around the core value of the target range by 2020.

In the international environment, uncertainty about the negative impact coronavirus is having on the Chinese economy and its potential effect on global growth has increased, exacerbating the process of slowing down the global economy that had been affected by trade disputes and geopolitical tensions in different regions of the world. Importantly, prior to the more accelerated spread of coronavirus in recent weeks, Consensus Forecasts (CFC), which brings together leading analyst firms making international projections, had projected a moderation of global growth, from 2.5% in 2019 to 2.4% by 2020. If the spread trend of the virus continues, these projections are expected to continue to be corrected downwards due to their effects on global production, trade and tourism.

In the United States of America, economic activity has gradually slowed as a result of slowing private investment and exports. Indeed, Consensus Forecasts projects that U.S. growth would moderate from 2.3% in 2019 to 1.9% by 2020. In this context and with low inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve maintains an accommodative monetary stance, continuing liquidity provision programs to the financial system through repurchase agreements (REPOS) of up to USD 125 billion and purchases of Treasury bills on the secondary market for USD 60 billion per month. In the face of the spread of the coronavirus that has caused a widespread decline in the world's major stock markets, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said last Friday that there are still warnings of increased risks to the U.S. economy and ready to use its tools, which would imply further reductions in the federal fund interest rate this year.

As for the Eurozone, economic growth has deteriorated to 1.2% at the end of 2019 and Consensus plans an even smaller expansion of 0.9% by 2020. The slowdown in this bloc of countries has been influenced by the weak performance of the industrial sector in its major economies and the slowdown in international trade. Considering the absence of inflationary pressures, the European Central Bank continues to implement a package of expansionary measures including a negative interest rate for short-term deposits of financial institutions, the liquidity provision programme for the channelling of credit to the private sector and the purchase of sovereign debt securities on the secondary market for 20 billion euros per month.

On the other hand, Latin America has accentuated the weakening of economic activity as a result of socio-political conflicts in several of the countries of the region. Thus, the IMF estimates that the region would have grown by just 0.1% in 2019 and projects a 1.6% recovery by 2020. The region's economic slowdown during 2019 has been influenced by negative growth rates in Mexico, Venezuela, Nicaragua, Argentina and Ecuador, as well as the modest expansion of Brazil and the negative impact of social demonstrations in Chile, Bolivia and Colombia.

It should be noted that, given the potential impact of coronavirus, the economic prospects of the largest economies in the Latin American region could deteriorate beyond expectations, owing to their trade ties with China and its status as exporters of primary goods, mainly food and metals.

Indeed, the price of most commodities has declined significantly, noting that the price of Texas' intermediate oil closed february below $45 a barrel, conditioned by the prospects for lower global demand. However, the price of gold has remained high, ranking above $1,500 per troy ounce at the close of February, as it was used as a haven of value in an environment of high uncertainty. This behaviour of oil and gold prices favors the Dominican Republic's terms of trade and benefits the external sector of the economy.

In the domestic context, the economy has reacted favourably to monetary easing measures, which boosted domestic demand through increased consumption and private investment, resulting in year-on-year growth of 5.1% in 2019, the highest in Latin America. At the end of February, private credit in national currency has continued to show high dynamism, reflected in an expansion rate of more than 12% year-on-year. Favourable monetary conditions are expected to continue to support domestic demand and the economy is expected to expand around its potential by 2020.

Because in recent years the Dominican Republic has strengthened its macroeconomic fundamentals, as a country it is better prepared than other emerging economies to navigate the adverse international landscape, characterized by high uncertainty due to the potential impact of coronavirus on the world economy. In this context, it is necessary to preserve economic stability, giving security and certainty to private actors in such a way as to maintain an enabling environment to sustain investment and growth, especially in a domestic environment affected by the election cycle.

In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as foreign direct investment and remittances continue to perform well, compensating for recent tourism moderation and contributing to maintaining relative exchange rate stability and continuing to strengthen The International Reserves, which currently amount to almost 10% of GDP. On the other hand, in the fiscal sector, the process of consolidation of public finances is maintained, with a deficit of 2.2% of GDP projected to be achieved at the end of this year.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this sense, the institution will continue to monitor the potential impact of the coronavirus on the world economy and the other factors of uncertainty both externally and internally and its effects on aggregate demand, being prepared to continue to react in a timely manner to factors that may generate deviations from the inflation target and affect Dominican economic growth.

