At its monetary policy meeting in March 2017, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to increase its monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points, from 5.50% per annum to 5.75% per annum, effective from 3 April. According to the short-term liquidity management scheme of the BCRD, the rate corridor was adjusted in the same proportion, which indicates that the rate of short-term remunerated deposits increases from 4.00% to 4.25% per annum and the rate of credit facilities. Expansion (repos) increases from 7.00% to 7.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate resulted from a broad analysis of the balance of risks around the inflation projections including the main macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy.

Regarding the price indicators, during the first two months of the year accumulated inflation reached 1.04%, while core inflation, related to monetary conditions, amounted to 2.01% year-on-year. However, after staying below the lower limit of the goal for a period of 30 months, the interannual rate of inflation rose to 3.34% in the month of February, placing within the range established in the Monetary Program of 4% ± 1 %. The forecast system indicates that, under an active scenario, inflation would be located around the target in the monetary policy horizon.
In the external sphere, the United States of America (US) revised upwards its growth rate of the last quarter of last year from 1.9% to 2.0% year-on-year, reaching a year-on-year expansion of 1.6% in 2016. The year-on-year inflation rate reached 2.7 % in the month of February, while the unemployment rate stood at 4.7% while continuing to observe improvements in various indicators of the labor market. In this context, the Federal Reserve (FED) increased its policy rate by 25 basis points, placing it in the 0.75% -1.00% range. It should be noted that in the opinion of the majority of the members of the FED board of governors, at least two additional increases in the policy rate could be expected for the remainder of the year. According to the Consensus Forecast, the US would grow around 2.2% in 2017 and 2.4% in 2018, while the inflation rate during those years would reach 2.5% and 2.3%, respectively.

On the other hand, after growing 1.7% in 2016, the actual production of the Euro Zone (ZE) would expand 1.6% in 2017 and 1.5% in 2018, according to Consensus Forecast. At the same time, inflation rates are expected for the SE of 1.7% and 1.4% for those years, below the goal of 2.0% of the European Central Bank (ECB). The macroeconomic conditions in the EZ have led the ECB to maintain an expansive monetary policy stance, with a reference rate of 0.0%. As a result, the interest rate differential between the US and the ZE has increased, which has created the conditions for a strong dollar in international markets.
In the case of Latin America, after a fall in GDP of -0.6% in 2016, the region would begin the recovery of economic growth according to the Consensus Forecast, projecting an expansion of the real product of 1.6% in 2017 and 2.6% in 2018. This growth is consistent with the fact that countries in the region that export commodities would benefit from higher prices of primary goods in international markets. In the case of oil, the price of the barrel is around US $ 50, which indicates an increase of 13.5% in relation to its value twelve months ago.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity continues to grow above its potential, although there is a gradual convergence at this level in the medium term. As of February, the trend-cycle of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) registered an interannual growth of 5.5%, in line with the projections of the Monetary Program. In turn, credit to the private sector in national currency expanded at an annual rate of around 11.0% at the end of March, a figure higher than nominal product growth.

On the fiscal policy side, public finances evolve according to the budget objective of a deficit of 2.3% of GDP for 2017, which would point to a primary surplus of 0.8% of GDP by the end of the year. Regarding external accounts, the current account deficit closed 2016 at 1.5% of GDP, its lowest level in a decade, allowing a significant accumulation of international reserves. As of March, international reserves remain above US $ 6,200 million, thus facilitating the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and to maintain macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
