The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its March 2016 Monetary Policy Meeting, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (MPR) unchanged at 5.00% per annum.

The interannual inflation rate stood at 1.74%, while the interannual core inflation, associated with monetary conditions, stood at 1.58% in the month of February. The decision on the benchmark interest rate takes into consideration that the forecast models and market expectations indicate that inflation would converge to the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0%, in the monetary policy horizon. The relevant international environment for the Dominican economy maintains a favorable trend in the short term, given that its main trading partner, the United States of America (USA) grows, while at the same time that international markets maintain low oil prices.

In the external context, the conditions of the world economy maintain a moderate growth outlook, characterized by an expansionary stance of monetary policy in some developed countries, volatility in emerging markets and a tendency for the US dollar to appreciate. Under this scenario, according to Consensus Forecast, the world economy would grow 2.5% in 2016 and 2.9% in 2017. EUA would grow by 2.1% in 2016 and 2.4% in 2017, while the Euro Zone would expand by 1.5% and 1.6%, respectively. , during those years.
Latin America (AL), as a whole, would present an economic contraction of -0.5% in 2016, due to the recession experienced by Venezuela (-8.3%), Brazil (-3.5%), Argentina (-0.7%) and Ecuador ( -0.9%). Likewise, the growth of other important countries in the region would be positive, but it would remain below 3.0%. Such is the case of Mexico (2.4%), Chile (1.9%), Colombia (2.5%) and Uruguay (1.9%). For 2017, a moderate recovery of LA is expected with a real growth rate of around 2.0%.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity evolves positively in the short term, growing at a real rate above potential production. Private loans in national currency show a year-on-year growth of around 12.5% ??at the end of March, exceeding nominal product growth.

The macroeconomic fundamentals of the Dominican economy remain strong, reflected in a low current account deficit estimated at around 2.0% of GDP and a moderate estimate of the budget deficit around 2.3% of GDP for 2016. This behavior of the policy fiscal favors the sustainability of public accounts. In a context of solid macroeconomic fundamentals like the current one, it facilitates the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate, as well as the accumulation of international reserves in an amount much higher than the historical average.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its goal of inflation and macroeconomic stability, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to react timely to risks on stability of prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
