BCRD keeps its monetary policy rate at 5.50% per year
At its monetary policy meeting in March 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to render the benchmark rate unchanged is based on detailed analysis of the risk balance around inflation forecasts, including information from international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. Inflation in February 2019 was 0.37%, leading to cumulative inflation of 0.20% in the first two months of the year. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation stood at 1.19%, while underlying inflation moderated to 2.26% in February, which excludes prices for the most volatile components. The BCRD's forecasting system and market expectations indicate that general inflation would gradually converge at the heart of the target range of 4.0% to 1.0% over the two-year monetary policy horizon.

In the international environment, the global economy would maintain an expansion rate of 2.8% during 2019 and 2020, according to Consensus Forecast. In the short term, the performance of advanced economies would continue to be led by the United States of America (USA). However, macroeconomic conditions show signs of gradual moderation in the US, with expansions estimated at 2.4% in 2019 and 2.0% in 2020. The Fed indicated that it would be patient in the process of monetary policy normalization, anticipating that no further increases in its benchmark interest rate would be made during the rest of the year, in a context of lower global growth, low inflationary pressures, and uncertainty in international markets about trade negotiations among the world's major economies.

On the other hand, Consensus again downwarded the growth outlook for the Euro Area (ZE), with an expansion of 1.2% in 2019 and 1.4% in 2020. In addition, projections indicate that inflation for this bloc of countries would remain below its target over the next few years, so the European Central Bank announced that it would keep its benchmark interest rate unchanged throughout 2019, while introducing new programmes to stimulate the channeling of credit to the private sector through financial institutions. This expansive stance of the ECB, together with the more gradual normalization of the monetary policy of the US Federal Reserve, would have a more favourable financial impact on emerging economies.

En relaci칩n a las materias primas, el petr칩leo ha mantenido una tendencia gradual al alza desde inicios de a침o, cotiz치ndose el precio del barril intermedio de Texas (WTI) en torno a US$60 al cierre marzo. Crude oil price performance has reflected lower supply in the face of cuts in production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and economic sanctions on oil-producing countries such as Iran and Venezuela.

In the domestic context, the Monthly Indicator for Economic Activity (IMAE) notes that the Dominican economy continues to grow above its potential, with a year-on-year expansion of 5.9% in the January-February period of this year, driven mainly by investment and private consumption, while highlighting the good performance of the Construction sectors (11.9%), Mining (11.5%) , Financial Services (9.5%), Transport and Storage (6.5%), Free Zones (4.5%), among others. The dynamism of domestic demand, coupled with favourable monetary conditions, has contributed to the continued growth of credit to the private sector in national currency at year-on-year rates of more than 10.0%.

With regard to fiscal policy, there is a balanced balance sheet of the Non-Financial Public Sector at the beginning of the year, with a primary surplus expected to be maintained during 2019, as envisaged in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as tourism, remittances and foreign direct investment maintain remarkable dynamism, contributing to relative exchange rate stability and facilitating the accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic remains attentive to the evolution of international financial conditions and the dynamics of the price of oil at a global level, as well as the potential impact of climate phenomena on the domestic economy, being prepared to react in a timely manner to any factor that may generate inflationary diversions. In this regard, the issuing body reaffirms its commitment to driving monetary policy towards the achievement of its inflation target and the smooth functioning of the financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability.