The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of March 2013, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (MPR) at 5.00% per annum. The decision on the reference interest rate takes into account that the forecast models predict that inflation would be within the target in the monetary policy horizon. In the same way, market expectations are close to this objective. In the month of February, the inflation rate was 0.33%. In interannual terms, general inflation stood at 4.73%, while core inflation rose to 5.15%, both within the target range for the current year.

In the external context, the US economy maintains moderate growth with important signs of recovery in key markets such as real estate. The Euro Zone continues to present a recessive panorama with a delicate financial and fiscal situation. According to the Economic Consensus (Consensus Forecast), the United States of America would be growing slightly below 2.0% in the current year, while the Euro Zone would register a fall in its economic activity of around 0.3%, which would imply two consecutive years of negative growth In Latin America, although forecasts point to higher growth than in 2012, the region could be affected by a fall in commodity prices that would imply more unfavorable terms of trade for emerging economies.
In the domestic sphere, production and domestic demand evolve moderately, below the potential production capacity of the economy. Credit to the private sector in national currency registered its highest growth in March 2013 in the last nine months. In year-on-year terms, private loans in local currency of all financial institutions grew above 5.0% and it is projected that by the end of the year their expansion would be in line with the nominal product. The recovery of private credit would contribute to a more rapid recovery of consumption and private investment, which would help to continue closing the output gap.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to adopt new measures in the face of risks on price stability and the good functioning of the financial and payment systems.
