At its monetary policy meeting in April 2017, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.75% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate resulted from a comprehensive analysis of the balance of risks around inflation projections including the main national macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. As of March 2017, accumulated inflation in the first quarter stood at 0.84%. In interannual terms, inflation stood at 3.14%, remaining within the range established in the Monetary Program of 4% ± 1%. The forecast system indicates that inflation would continue within the target range in the current year.

Externally, the world economy would grow 3.5% in 2017 and 3.6% in 2018, according to the IMF. For Consensus Forecast, the developed economies would continue showing a high dynamism. In that sense, the United States of America (USA) presents a projection of growth around 2.2% in 2017 and 2.4% in 2018, while the Euro Zone (ZE) would expand 1.7% in 2017 and 1.5% in 2018. On the other On the other hand, the US inflation rate would reach 2.5% and 2.3%, respectively, during those years, while in the ZE inflation rates of 1.6% and 1.4% are expected, below the Bank's 2.0% target. European Central (ECB). The macroeconomic conditions in the EZ have led the ECB to maintain an expansive monetary policy stance. As a result, the interest rate differential between the US and the ZE has increased, helping to strengthen the dollar in international markets.
In the case of Latin America, Consensus Forecast projects a real product expansion of 1.6% in 2017 and 2.6% in 2018. This growth is consistent with the fact that the countries of the region that are net exporters of commodities would benefit from higher prices of primary goods in international markets.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity continues to expand above its potential, observing a tendency to gradually converge to this level in the medium term. As of March, the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) grows in line with the projections of the Monetary Program. Credit to the private sector in national currency expanded at an annual rate of around 10.0% at the end of April, consistent with the estimated nominal GDP growth rate.

On the fiscal policy side, public spending has moderated and is evolving according to the provisions of the 2017 budget. Regarding external accounts, the current account deficit closed 2016 at 1.4% of GDP, allowing a significant accumulation of international reserves and facilitating the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The BCRD reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and maintain macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
