The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its Monetary Policy meeting in April 2012, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Rate unchanged at 6.75% per annum. At the same time, it decided to leave the Lombard Interest Rate unchanged at 9.0% per annum.

The decision regarding the benchmark interest rate is based on the fact that in March, the interannual rate of inflation converged to the target for 2012 of 5.5% ± 1%, at 4.94%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation fell to 3.94%, below its historical average. Forecasts indicate that inflationary pressures are not expected to rise in the monetary policy horizon.

In the external context, the most recent indicators of the United States show a moderate recovery process, while data from Europe confirm the weakness of its economic growth, while some countries such as Spain and England have entered recession. On the other hand, emerging economies continue to be the engine of growth of the world economy, although they show less dynamism than last year.
The risks arising from the European crisis remain high due to the resurgence of some financial tensions in the markets of that region. Globally, markets have been experiencing greater volatility and risk aversion given the uncertainty surrounding some advanced economies. International prices of raw materials have decreased slightly in the last month, but remain at relatively high levels.

In the domestic sphere, demand and economic activity continue to grow moderately. Similarly, credit to the private sector in national currency is expanding at around 10% per year, a rate close to the growth projection of nominal GDP for the current year. On the other hand, market inflation expectations, both for the end of this year and for the next 12 months, show a slight decrease, remaining close to the target. So far in 2012, inflationary pressures continue to decline, registering an increase of 0.15% in the Consumer Price Index in March, with cumulative inflation of 0.94% during the first quarter of the year. The reduction in inflationary pressures has contributed to maintaining the downward trend of the interannual inflation rate, while maintaining the relative stability of the exchange rate. The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve the inflation target of 5.5% ± 1% for 2012, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to react in a timely manner to risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
