The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of April 2013, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (TPM) at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference interest rate takes into account that the forecast models predict that inflation would be around the target in the monetary policy horizon. In the same way, the expectations of the market are located around this objective. Accumulated inflation during the first three months of the year amounted to 1.97%. In March, the interannual inflation rate stood at 4.97%, within the target range defined for the current year, while the interannual core inflation was 5.23%.

In the external context, some indicators of the US economy, such as those related to the real estate and consumer sectors, show a moderate recovery. However, preliminary figures indicate that the growth of the first quarter (2.5%) was lower than expected by the market (3.0%). For the year 2013, according to the latest forecasts of the Consensus Forecast, the United States of America's economy is expected to grow around 2.0%, below the 2.2% expansion registered in 2012. On the other hand, in the Euro Zone , the productive activity would remain in recession and it is estimated a fall of the GDP of the area of ??0.4% in the current year.
At the Latin American level, Consensus Forecast forecasts a 3.4% growth for this year. In April, most of the countries in the region maintained their monetary policy stance, with the exception of Brazil and Guatemala, which increased their reference rate in the face of higher inflation in their respective economies. Globally, inflation prospects remain low, with reductions in international oil and gold prices, despite the recent announcement of an increase in the monetary issue of the Bank of Japan.

In the domestic sphere, during the first quarter some production and domestic demand indicators show a deceleration higher than expected in economic activity, according to the Monetary Program. Credit to the private sector in national currency would be growing at an annual rate of around 6% in March, lower than the projected growth in nominal GDP for the end of the year. In April, the monthly variation of loans to the private sector in national currency showed a slowdown with respect to what was observed in the first three months of the year. Other variables, such as domestic imports, also show a downward trend, registering a fall of 5.7% during the first quarter of the year.
The behavior of credit and domestic economic activity would seem to indicate that it would be worthwhile to take measures that, without altering price stability, help stimulate the economy.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to adopt new measures in the face of risks on price stability and the good functioning of the financial and payment systems.