At its monetary policy meeting in April 2014, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep the monetary policy interest rate unchanged at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate takes into account the revision of the risk balance around the inflation projections and the market expectations. In January-March, the cumulative inflation rate was 1.10%, which influenced the interannual rate to be 2.99%, below the lower end of the target range for 2014 of 4.5% ± 1%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, was 3.21% at the end of the quarter.

Externally, the recovery of the developed economies continues, mainly the United States of America, where an economic growth rate close to 2.7% is expected in 2014, in an environment of low inflation and without changes in the policy interest rate. in the next months. In the Eurozone, the outlook for moderate recovery remains around 1.2% for 2014, according to the Consensus Forecast. Emerging economies continue to project a lower rate of expansion than in previous years. In the case of Latin America, the consensus points to 2.3% growth for 2014, in an environment of reduced terms of trade in the region and lower liquidity in international markets. In recent months, the prices of some raw materials, particularly oil and food, have remained stable. The absence of inflationary pressures worldwide would favor low interest rates in developed countries for the rest of the year.
In the domestic sphere, the trend-cycle of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) grows around 5.1% at the end of the first quarter and it is expected that the real Gross Domestic Product will increase around 4.5% in 2014, according to what is planned in the macroeconomic framework. At the same time, credit to the private sector in national currency expanded above 14.5% at the end of March and it is expected that it would be growing at a rate close to 10.0% at the end of the year, a rhythm consistent with the expected path in GDP nominal. Additionally, the influx of foreign currency into the economy would be improving due to the entry of important resources from the recent placement of the sovereign bond, to a more favorable behavior of exports of goods and services and remittances, given the improvement in the economy of our main business partner. This inflow of resources would help maintain the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.