BCRD keeps its monetary policy rate at 3.50% per year
At its monetary policy meeting in April 2020, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 3.50% per annum. In addition, the interest rate for the permanent ease of expansion (Repos to 1 day) remains at 4.50% per annum, while the interest rate on paid deposits (Overnight) stands at 2.50% per annum.

The decision on the benchmark rate is based on a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the current uncertainty on macroeconomic stability and future inflation developments. In this sense, the monthly inflation of March was -0.52 %, while the inflation accumulated during the first three months of the year was -0.32%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from March 2019 to March 2020, moderated to 2.45%, below the target range of 4.0% to 1.0%, while the underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, reached 2.67%. Moving forward, the BCRD forecasting system indicates that inflation would remain below the lower bound of the target range for the remainder of 2020. Low inflationary pressures give the BCRD greater degrees of freedom to continue reacting in a timely manner to the adverse impact of COVID-19 on the Dominican economy, if necessary.

In the international environment, the accelerated spread of coronavirus has forced strong containment measures, which would have a significant negative impact on global economic activity. As a result, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), in its Report World Economic Outlook published in April, decreased global growth projections from 2.9% in 2019 to -3.0% in 2020. In response to the deterioration in global growth, central banks around the world have taken monetary easing and liquidity provision measures to support their countries' domestic demands.

In the United States of America (USA), the IMF projects that economic activity would contract this year, ranging from an expansion of 2.3% in 2019 to -5.9% by 2020. Indeed, preliminary estimates indicate that growth in the U.S. economy moderated to 0.3% year-on-year during the first quarter, influenced by a fall in consumption and private investment. In this context of uncertainty, high stock market volatility and low inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve (Fed) reduced the federal funds rate by 150 basis points during the month of March, placing it in the range of 0% - 0.25%. In addition, the Fed expanded its liquidity provision programs to the financial system through Repos to varying terms of up to 90 days, purchases on the secondary market of Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities and credit channeling programs for small and medium-sized enterprises through financial institutions.

As for the Euro Zone, the IMF projects that COVID-19 will cause an even greater contraction in this bloc of countries, moving from 1.2% growth in 2019 to -7.5% by 2020. In response to the impact of coronavirus, the European Central Bank keeps the rate of short-term deposits (Overnight) at -0.50% per annum, while extending the liquidity provision programme for private credit pipeline through financial institutions and expanding the purchase of public and private securities on the secondary market.

On the other hand, Latin America, which was already facing a weakened economic situation, has been simultaneously affected by the impact of coronavirus and falling commodity prices, causing a reduction in the regional growth outlook to -5.2% by 2020. In this context, the central banks of Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Colombia, Peru, Guatemala, Honduras and Costa Rica have lowered their interest rates this year, as well as taking additional liquidity provision measures through financial institutions.

In relation to raw materials, a substantial reduction in the price of Texas intermediate oil has been observed due to a combination of low demand and increased inventories, placing below $15 a barrel at the end of April. By contrast, the price of gold has increased, ranking around $1,700 per troy ounce, when it is used as a value haven in an environment of high uncertainty. The price dynamics of primary goods implies an improvement in terms of trade for the Dominican Republic which is reflected in a decrease in the oil turnover and an increase in gold exports, which along with the flow of remittances received during the first quarter of the year exceeding US$1.7 billion and the growth of domestic and free zone exports , partially offset the impact of COVID-19 on the external sector.

Importantly, at the time of the pandemic containment measures in the Dominican Republic, the economy was in a favourable cyclical position, characterized by economic growth around potential and low inflationary pressures, giving it the flexibility to accommodate this adverse shock through the adoption of expansive monetary measures aimed at boosting domestic demand. Indeed, preliminary information from the Monthly Economic Activity Index (IMAE) indicates a marked slowdown during the month of March in relation to the pace of expansion observed in January and February, although the economy would not be recording negative growth during the first quarter of the year in the face of the impact of COVID-19.

In this context, the Central Bank has adopted in March and April a set of monetary and financial measures aimed at preserving economic stability and mitigating the effects of coronavirus through increased financing for productive sectors and households at lower interest rates. In particular, of the total RD$100 billion that has been made available to financial intermediation entities, some RD$50 billion have been channelled through different facilities. Of this amount, some RD$10 billion correspond to private loans granted through the release of resources from the legal lace and some RD$40 billion to provision liquidity to financial intermediation entities through Repos up to 90 days.

It is emphasized that, even under current conditions of high uncertainty, legal lace resources are being channelled at a faster rate than all previous occasions when this monetary policy instrument has been used. In addition, there has also been a significant reduction of around 300 basis points in interest rates on loans granted by multiple banks during the month of April and greater dynamism in monetary aggregates.

These favourable monetary conditions have contributed to an acceleration of credit to the private sector expanding by around 13% year-on-year, highlighting the channelling of loans to the Manufacturing, Hotels and Restaurants, Construction and Commerce sectors. The dynamism of private credit increases access to working capital for sectors currently operating at full capacity and provides greater liquidity to those activities suspended by the pandemic. It is important to note that the Central Bank has the necessary space to continue to support the productive sectors and households, once the sanitary conditions allow for a process of gradual normalization of the economy, and facilitate a rapid recovery in domestic demand.

On the other hand, it should be noted that the approval of the disbursement of some US$650 million as emergency financial assistance by the IMF, equivalent to 100% of the country's share in this multilateral body, will help the Dominican government continue to face the challenges posed by COVID-19. Access to these resources, together with the Central Bank's $622 million foreign currency liquidity provision measures and the Central Bank's high levels of international reserves, will help maintain relative exchange rate stability in the face of a convulsing international environment.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this regard, the institution will continue to monitor the impact of the coronavirus on the Dominican economy, being prepared to continue reacting in a timely manner to factors that may lead to deviations from the inflation target and affect economic growth.