BCRD keeps its monetary policy rate at 5.50% per year

At its monetary policy meeting in May 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to keep the benchmark rate unchanged is based on detailed analysis of the risk balance against inflation forecasts, including information from international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. April's monthly inflation was 0.53%, while cumulative inflation in the first four months of the year reached 1.39%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation stood at 1.61%, while underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, moderated to 2.07% in April. The BCRD forecasting system indicates that inflation would remain until the end of 2019 below the lower bound of the target range of 4.0% x 1.0%, converging at the centre of the target by 2020.

The international environment has become more volatile, increasing uncertainty factors, including the escalation of trade disputes between major economies, the lack of agreement around the UK's exit from the European Union (Brexit) and the persistence of socio-political tensions in some emerging economies. Against this complex scenario, the growth outlook for the global economy has been revised downwards, estimated at 2.8% for 2019 and 2.9% by 2020, according to Consensus Forecasts.

The performance of advanced economies continues to be driven by the United States of America,s.), although current indicators point to a potential slowdown for this economy in the medium term. Indeed, Consensus's projections indicate potential moderation in U.S. growth from 2.9% in 2018 to 2.6% in 2019 and 1.9% in 2020. Considering the prospects for a likely deterioration in economic activity, the Federal Reserve is expected to not make increases in its benchmark interest rate for the remainder of 2019, while the market expects at least a reduction in US interest rates by the end of this year.
Also, in the face of slowing growth in the major euro zone economies (EES), growth prospects for this bloc remain low, with expansions estimated to be 1.1% in 2019 and 1.3% by 2020, according to Consensus. In view of this scenario, the European Central Bank has announced that it would maintain an expansive monetary policy stance at least until the end of 2019, while implementing a new liquidity provision programme to stimulate the private sector's lending pipeline through financial institutions.

In Latin America, growth forecasts were revised downwards, with an expansion of 1.3% in 2019. It is important to note that the behavior within the region is heterogeneous. On the one hand, Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua would remain in recession, while the two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, are projected to grow below 1.5%. On the other hand, a group of economies would continue to grow with strong macroeconomic fundamentals, such as the Dominican Republic, Panama, Peru and Chile.

In relation to raw materials, the price of oil has shown a downward trend recently, influenced by a moderation in global demand and concerns about trade tensions. Indeed, the price of Texas intermediate crude oil (WTI) fell below $55.0 a barrel at the end of May, below the level stipulated in the National Budget of $60.0 a barrel.

In the domestic context, credit to the private sector has gradually slowed its pace of expansion, rising by 9.2% year-on-year at the end of May. In this sense, the recent action announced by the Monetary Board to release more than RD$29 billion of resources from the legal loophole, in an environment of low inflationary pressures, will contribute to boosting credit and growing the economy at the pace stipulated in the Monetary Programme of around 5.5%.

With regard to fiscal policy, a balanced balance of the non-financial public sector is observed during the first months of the year, with a waiting for a primary surplus to be maintained during 2019, as envisaged in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as tourism, remittances and foreign direct investment perform well, contributing to relative exchange rate stability and facilitating greater accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic continues to monitor the moderation of the world economy and the uncertainty factors of the international environment, as well as its potential impact on the performance of domestic demand, being prepared to react in a timely manner to factors that may lead to deviations from the monetary agenda targets. 