The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of May 2013, decided to reduce its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (MPR) from 5.00% to 4.25%. . This is the first reduction of the MPR since August 2012. According to the new short-term liquidity management scheme of the Central Bank, the interest rates of permanent expansion and monetary contraction facilities will decrease to 6.25% and 2.25% annual, respectively.

The decision on the benchmark interest rate takes into account that the forecast models indicate that there will be no major inflationary pressures in the coming months and no deviations from inflation are expected with respect to its target in the monetary policy horizon. On the other hand, production is below its potential capacity and during the quarter January-March recorded a growth rate below the average of recent years, as a result of the weakness that domestic demand has been showing. Macroeconomic models indicate that, if measures are not taken, production will remain below its potential until the end of 2014. Market inflation expectations are located around the objective of the Monetary Program.

In terms of price data, in April the monthly inflation rate was -0.06%, while in accumulated terms it reached 1.9% in the first four months of the year. The year-on-year inflation rate fell to 4.9% in April, influenced by the negative inflation of that month. Additionally, the interannual core inflation stood at 5.0%, also presenting a downward trend with respect to the previous month.

In the external context, the Euro Zone remains in recession, registering a fall in its economic activity of 0.8% in the first quarter of the year. The United States of America, on the other hand, achieved 2.5% growth in the same period, which confirms the moderate recovery trend that this economy has been exhibiting since the end of 2011. According to the Consensus Forecast, the economies of the Euro Zone and The US would present growth of around -0.5% and 1.9% at the end of the year, respectively. In Japan, the recent measures of monetary expansion have brought optimism in that economy, but China and other important emerging economies have shown signs of slowdown, reflecting the latter in a fall in the prices of primary goods, especially minerals. International financial conditions have improved, despite the fragility of the fiscal situation in some industrialized economies.

In the domestic sphere, the economic activity measured by the Real Gross Domestic Product grew 0.3% in the first quarter, reflecting a notable weakness in domestic demand and an excess supply of goods and services. However, credit to the private sector in national currency would be accelerating, influenced by the recent measures to liberalize reserve requirements, which has allowed year-on-year growth of private loans in national currency of over 8% in May. The expansion of private credit indicated is in line with the projection of nominal GDP growth for the year end of 8.2%. As for the external sector, exports would be growing due to the increase in mining exports. This, combined with the drop in imports of goods and services and the reduction in the value of the oil bill, would allow an improvement in the current account of the balance of payments by the end of the year.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target. At the same time, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to adopt, if necessary, new measures that contribute to boost credit and stimulate domestic demand, provided that they do not jeopardize price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
