The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its Monetary Policy Meeting of May 2012 decided, effective June 1, to reduce its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (Overnight) by 75 basis points, from 6.75% to 6.0% per annum. At the same time, it decided to reduce the Lombard Rate by 100 basis points, from 9.0% to 8.0% annually. With this decision, the policy rate corridor narrows.

The decision regarding the benchmark interest rate is based on the fact that in a passive scenario, projections point to an inflation rate below the lower limit of the target for this year. In fact, in the month of April, the interannual rate of inflation was 4.0%, below the goal that this year was established at 5.5% ± 1%. Core interannual inflation, which is associated with monetary inflationary pressures, fell to 3.7%, its lowest level in the last two years. The forecast models indicate that no significant inflationary pressures are expected in the monetary policy horizon.

In the external context, the growth of the US economy continues to be moderate, while increasing uncertainty about how the European Union would solve its financial and fiscal sustainability problems, strengthening the prospects for weak economic growth for that area. On the other hand, in recent months emerging economies have shown a more modest performance than anticipated, although growth expectations remain positive, particularly in emerging Asia and Latin America. The moderation in global economic activity and the greater uncertainty about the European crisis have contributed to reversing the upward trend observed in the prices of raw materials at the beginning of the year. In that sense, the international price of oil has been reduced since last March, falling below the forecasts of the Economic Consensus and the IMF for the current year.
In the domestic sphere, economic activity continues to show a moderate performance, growing around 4% during the first quarter of the year, a rate below its potential. The current levels of interest rates and expectations created by the electoral cycle have slowed the rate of growth of credit to the private sector in national currency, which has been below the nominal GDP growth forecast for the current year. Despite the external situation, the performance of the export sector continues to improve, while the growth of imports has moderated and a higher-than-expected increase in foreign direct investment is projected. These factors help to relieve pressures on external accounts. Regarding market inflation expectations, economic surveys show a more positive scenario with inflation forecasts in the target range, both for 2012 and 2013.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve the inflation target of 5.5% ± 1% for 2012, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to react in a timely manner to risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
