At its May 2014 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep the monetary policy interest rate unchanged at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as market expectations on the main macroeconomic variables. In April, the interannual rate of inflation amounted to 3.49%, placing itself at the lower end of the target range for 2014 of 4.5% ± 1%. Accumulated inflation in the first four months of the year was 1.53%. On the other hand, core interannual inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, was 3.39% at the end of April.

In the external sphere, the recovery prospects of the developed economies and a modest performance of the developing countries remain. However, in the face of extreme weather conditions, the United States of America revised its inter-annual growth from the first quarter downwards from 2.3% to 2.0%. Regarding the growth forecast for the end of the year, Consensus Forecast modified its estimate from 2.7% to 2.5%. On the other hand, the Euro Zone shows a growth of 0.9% in the first quarter, driven by a 2.3% expansion of the German economy. Low inflationary pressures in industrialized countries anticipate the maintenance of low international interest rates for an extended period, while the financial conditions faced by emerging economies tend to improve. The prices of primary goods, particularly oil and food, have remained relatively stable in the last month.
In the domestic sphere, the trend-cycle of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity expanded by around 6.0% for the month of April, indicating that, if this trend continues, the dynamics of national production could exceed growth projections. At the same time, monetary conditions have improved during the first part of the year. While the monetary aggregates present interannual growth rates of around 10% at the end of May, the financial entities maintain sufficient liquidity to continue channeling resources to the productive sectors. Credit to the private sector in national currency grew around 13.5% year-to-year at the end of May. It is expected that this healthy rate of expansion in private loans will be maintained for the rest of the year in the face of favorable monetary conditions, which, in an environment of growth and inflation projections in the target range, suggests a neutral stance on monetary policy. In the area of ??fiscal accounts, public investment has been reactivated in line with the provisions of the National Budget, while fiscal revenues remain above the estimate. Regarding the external sector, the positive result of the global balance of payments, driven by a current account surplus in the first quarter of the year, anticipates low pressures in the foreign exchange market.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
