At its monetary policy meeting in May 2017, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.75% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate resulted from a comprehensive analysis of the balance of risks around the inflation projections including the main national macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy.

The price data for the month of April show that the accumulated inflation for the first four months of the year was 1.11%. In turn, in annual terms, April inflation reached 3.51%, remaining within the target range of 4% ± 1% established in the Monetary Program. On the other hand, core inflation, related to monetary conditions, amounted to 2.16%. According to the most recent projections, inflation would remain within the target range in the policy horizon.

In the international context, the economy of the United States of America (USA) would be growing around 2.1% in 2017 and 2.4% in 2018, according to Consensus Forecast. Also, inflation would be 2.4% and 2.2% in 2017 and 2018, respectively. The market expects to continue the process of normalization of monetary policy with further rate increases, by the FED, in the coming months. On the other hand, in the Euro Zone (ZE) economic activity would continue to expand around the potential, registering annual rates of 1.7% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. Inflation in this block of countries would remain below the target of 2.0% of the European Central Bank (ECB), reaching 1.6% and 1.4% in 2017 and 2018, respectively.
For Latin America, the Consensus Forecast contemplates an exit from the recession in 2017, leaving Venezuela as the only country that would register a fall in its economic activity during the current year. The projections indicate that the region would expand by 1.6% this year and 2.6% by 2018, in the face of more favorable terms of trade. On the other hand, oil prices remain around US $ 50 per barrel, and current prospects do not contemplate significant fluctuations in the price of this mineral.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity grew 5.2% in the first quarter of the year, gradually approaching its potential. Preliminary information of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) show a moderate growth in the month of April, due to the intense rains registered in some regions of the country, as well as for the purposes of statistical comparability given the high dynamism shown by the economy in April of 2016. Despite this moderation, a growth in the range of 5.0-5.5% is projected for this year, in line with that contemplated in the Monetary Program. Credit to the private sector in national currency increased at an annual rate of around 10.5% in May, consistent with the rate of expansion of economic activity in nominal terms.
On the fiscal side, budget execution indicates a policy in line with the goals established in the government's financial plan. In that sense, as of April, government spending showed a decrease with respect to the level reached in the same period last year. This behavior, together with a significant improvement in revenues in May, points to the government meeting its deficit target of 2.3% of GDP for 2017, which implies a primary surplus of 0.8% of GDP. Regarding external accounts, foreign exchange generating activities, such as tourism and remittances, maintain a good performance, contributing to the strengthening of international reserves and facilitating the maintenance of the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and to maintain macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
