At its monetary policy meeting in May 2015, the Central Bank (BCRD) decided to reduce its monetary policy interest rate (MPR) for the third consecutive month. On this occasion, it decreased by 25 basis points, from 5.25% to 5.00% per annum, as of June 1, 2015. With this decision, the cumulative reduction of the MPR this year is 125 basis points.

According to the BCRD short-term liquidity management scheme, the rate of paid deposits (overnight) is reduced from 3.75% to 3.50% per year and the rate of expansion facilities (repos) decreases from 6.75% to 6.50% per annum .

The decision to reduce the reference rate was adopted after analyzing the national macroeconomic panorama, especially the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as the evolution of the relevant international environment and its impact on market and economic expectations. Dominican It is expected that the policy decision will favorably affect economic growth without putting the inflation target at risk in the policy horizon.

The interannual inflation rate in April stood at -0.04%, while the accumulated inflation so far this year stood at -0.09%. Additionally, core inflation, related to the monetary conditions of the economy, fell in April to 2.37% year-on-year. The projections continue indicating that inflation would remain below the lower limit of the goal for the current year of 4.0% ± 1.0%, during 2015.
Externally, the most recent data on the world economy show little change since last month. The economies of developed countries maintain their recovery process. Consensus Forecast projects growth for the United States of America (USA) around 2.5% in 2015 and 2.8% in 2016, converging the unemployment rate in the coming months to its full employment level of 5.25%. On the other hand, an expansion is foreseen for the Euro Zone of 1.5% in the current year and 1.8% next year.

Latin America continues to grow well below its historical average and some of the largest economies, such as Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela, are in recession. According to Consensus Forecast, the region's growth would reach 0.4% in 2015. After several months of decline, oil prices have shown a slight upturn in the last month, although they still remain at levels lower than last year. The US dollar maintains a significant degree of appreciation in interannual terms in the international exchange markets.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity grew 6.5% in real terms during the first quarter of the year, lower than the rate of 8.1% in the same period last year. Also, in the Financial System, the annual growth rate of credit to the private sector in national currency was around 12.0% in May, below the 15.5% expansion rate, reached at the end of last year. . On the fiscal policy side, the budgetary execution of the first quarter presents a surplus balance and suggests that a primary surplus would be obtained by the end of 2015. Additionally, the current account of the balance of payments is projected to register a deficit around to 2.0% of GDP by the end of the year. This level is lower than its historical average and lower than the 3.2% of GDP registered in 2014, which would facilitate relative stability in the foreign exchange market and the accumulation of international reserves over and above what is planned in the Monetary Program.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
