At its monetary policy meeting in June 2014, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep the monetary policy interest rate unchanged at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as market expectations, both on this variable and on the rest of the main macroeconomic indicators. In May, the interannual inflation rate rose to 3.70%, remaining around the lower end of the target range for 2014 of 4.5% ± 1%. The accumulated inflation in the five months computed of the year is 1.55%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, remained at 3.39% at the end of May.

Externally, the outlook for the world economy remains consistent with the recovery of the developed economies and a modest performance of the developing countries. However, in the face of extreme weather conditions, the United States of America (USA) revised its year-on-year first quarter growth again from 2.0% to 1.5%. This implies a growth of 2.2% for the current year, according to Consensus Forecast. One point to note is that the forecasts for 2015 and 2016 have not changed, so no changes are expected in the interest rate of the FED until next year.
One of the reasons why policymakers in the US, mainly the Federal Reserve, foresee that there would be no interest rate increases in the rest of the year, is because of the labor market situation. For the current authorities of the FED, labor data is a relevant input in the decision making of monetary policy. Indicators such as the rate of hiring, resignation, duration of unemployment and hours worked show a marked improvement, which has led the FED to project unemployment rates closer to their pre-crisis levels, between 5.0% and 5.5% , for the next two years. The trend exhibited by the labor market is good news for emerging markets, since there would be no capital outflow in search of greater profitability abroad, decreasing the risks coming from international markets.

On the other hand, the Euro Zone continues recovering with a growth close to 1.0%, but with a trend that presents risks of deflation. To moderate these risks and with the objective of expanding aggregate demand and employment in the region, the European Central Bank decided to implement new monetary stimulus measures at its meeting in June. In that sense, it reduced the monetary policy and deposit facility rates by 10 basis points, each, and the loan facility rate by 35 basis points. Additionally, and with the purpose of supporting credit to households and non-financial corporations, it decided to carry out new liquidity injection operations for approximately 400 billion euros. In the case of Latin America, the growth projections of the Consensus Forecast have also been revised down to 2.1%, due to the influence of negative growth rates in Venezuela and Argentina, and a moderate expansion in the region's largest economy. , Brazil.
In the domestic sphere, the trend-cycle of the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity remains around 6.0%, indicating dynamism in short-term economic behavior. The dynamics of economic activity has contributed to improving labor market conditions. According to the National Labor Force Survey of April, during the period October 2013-April 2014, 130,944 new net jobs were generated, surpassing the preliminary projections that were announced last March. With these results, the jobs created in the last 18 months, since October 2012, total about 200,745 new net employed. The creation of jobs has been reflected in a reduction of the open unemployment rate from 7.0% in October 2013 to 6.8% in April 2014.

Likewise, credit to the private sector in national currency grew around 12.5% ??year-on-year at the end of June, above that foreseen in the Monetary Program. This rate of expansion in private loans in national currency would remain for the rest of the year. On the other hand, fiscal policy is executed in line with the provisions of the National Budget. In this sense, the Central Government practically reached a balance in its public finances in January-April, registering a small deficit of just 0.1% of GDP. The current account deficit continues showing a tendency to improve, influenced by the positive result of the first quarter of the year. This, together with a greater inflow of remittances and an increase in income from tourism, has enabled the Central Bank to revise its medium-term projection for this indicator downwards. The improvement of the current account anticipates low pressures in the exchange market in the coming quarters. In short, with a growing economy, low exchange rate pressures, inflation that is projected around its goal and an improvement in the labor market, the Central Bank has decided to maintain its monetary policy stance.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
