The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD), in its Monetary Policy Meeting of June 2016, decided to maintain the MPR at an annual 5.0%.

The decision on the reference interest rate takes into account that both forecast models and market expectations predict that inflation would converge to the lower limit of the target by the end of this year. In May, the year-on-year inflation rate stood at 1.71%, influenced by inflation of 0.25% in the month, accumulating a variation rate of the consumer price index of -0.42% in the first five months of the year. year. Core interannual inflation stood at 1.56%.

In the external context, the international financial markets experienced volatility after the decision of the voters of the United Kingdom to vote in favor of the exit of their country from the European Union, the so-called Brexit. The uncertainty caused by this decision led the Consensus Forecast to make downward adjustments to its economic growth forecasts for the Euro Zone from 1.6% to 1.5% in 2016, and from 1.6% to 1.0% in 2017, while for the United States of America (USA), the expected effect would be more moderate, going from 1.9% to 1.8% in 2016 and from 2.3% to 2.1% in 2017. The greatest impact of Brexit would be received by the United Kingdom itself, whose exports The rest of Europe is close to 50% while its imports to this region amount to 7.0%. This has led to the expectations of economic growth in the United Kingdom to be reduced from 1.9% to 1.4% in 2016.

In the international markets, the appreciation of the US dollar continues. Long-term interest rates in some of the developed economies continue to show a downward trend, while the price of oil has reached around US $ 50 per barrel. As for the price of gold, it is currently growing and is placed above US $ 1,300 an ounce, its highest level so far this year.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand maintain a positive behavior. In effect, the Monthly Index of Economic Activity (IMAE) grows 7.0% in the period January-May in year-on-year terms, rate above the growth of the potential product. Credit to the private sector in national currency as of June grew around 11.6% year-on-year, higher than the nominal product of the economy.

With regard to fiscal policy, the Central Government is expected to comply with the forecasts of a budget deficit of around 2.3% of GDP by the end of the year. Likewise, the external sector would present a current account deficit of around 1.9% of GDP in 2016. Under this context, the exchange market would remain relatively stable and would continue to facilitate the accumulation of international reserves during the current year.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to adopt new measures in the face of stability risks. of prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.