The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monthly Monetary Policy Meeting of June 2012, decided to maintain its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (Overnight) at 6.0% per annum. At the same time, it decided to leave the Lombard Rate unchanged at 8.0% per annum.

The decision not to vary the reference interest rate is based on the fact that the projections confirm that the inflation rate would continue around the lower limit of the target for the rest of the year. Indeed, in the month of May, the interannual inflation rate stood at 3.54%, below the target of 5.5% ± 1% for this year 2012. The interannual core inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, reached 3.67. %, while accumulated inflation in the January-May period stood at 0.68%. The forecast models do not foresee significant inflationary pressures in the monetary policy horizon.

In the external context, in June, the Federal Reserve Bank of the United States adjusted its growth forecast downward, from a range of 2.2% -2.8% to a range of 1.9% -2.4%, at the same time it foresees a lower inflation and higher unemployment. On the other hand, the Eurozone maintains a recession scenario with growth projections of -0.4% according to consensus. International financial markets show an increase in risk aversion due to uncertainty about the debt and fiscal crisis in some countries of the European Union, mainly Greece and Spain. International prices of primary goods continue to show a downward trend, although they remain high with respect to their historical averages.

In the domestic sphere, the production and domestic demand indicators maintain a moderate trend and the projections indicate, in a passive scenario, that there would be idle production capacity so that the output gap would remain negative in the medium term. The growth forecasts for the end of the year point to a range of 4.0% -4.5%, in an environment of low inflationary pressures and relative stability of the exchange rate. Real interest rates remain positive which favors savings over consumption and investment spending, while the rate of growth of credit to the private sector has continued to moderate. The inflation expectations of the market are anchored around the goal, both for 2012 and for 2013.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve the inflation target of 5.5% ± 1% for 2012, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to react in a timely manner to risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
