BCRD keeps its monetary policy rate at 3.50% per year

Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. At its monetary policy meeting in June 2020, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 3.50% per annum. In addition, the interest rate for the permanent ease of expansion (Repos to 1 day) remains at 4.50% per annum, while the interest rate on paid deposits (Overnight) stands at 2.50% per year.

The decision on the benchmark rate is based on a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the current uncertainty on macroeconomic stability and future inflation developments. In this sense, May's monthly inflation was -0.11%, while the inflation accumulated during the first four months of the year was -1.25%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from May 2019 to May 2020, moderated to 0.99%, below the target range of 4.0% to 1.0%, while the underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, reached 3.10%. Moving forward, the BCRD's forecasting system notes that inflation would recover gradually, placing at the end of the year around the lower bound of the target range, which grants the BCRD degrees of freedom to maintain an expansive monetary policy stance aimed at mitigating COVID-19's adverse impact on the Dominican economy.

High uncertainty prevails in the international environment, even though, in those economies that have passed the most critical phases of the pandemic, containment measures that forced the cessation of productive activities and which have widespreadly deteriorated economic activity have begun to be lifted. In this regard, Consensus Forecasts and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) significantly reduced global growth projections, estimating contractions of 4.7% and 4.9% in 2020, respectively. In response to the weakening of global growth, central banks around the world continue to implement monetary easing and liquidity provision measures to support their countries' domestic demands.

In the United States of America (USA), the IMF projects that economic activity would contract this year, moving from an expansion of 2.3% in 2019 to -8.0% by 2020. Indeed, growth in the U.S. economy moderated to 0.3% year-on-year during the first quarter, while the labour market deteriorated during this period. However, in recent months several indicators begin to show signs of a recovery, including the reduction in unemployment from 14.7% in April to 13.3% in May, as well as ups and turns off retail sales and consumption of durable goods. In this context of low growth and lack of inflation, the Federal Reserve (Fed) has adopted a group of expansive monetary measures, with the federal funds rate expected to remain in the range of 0% - 0.25% until 2022. In addition, the Fed continues to implement various quantitative easing programs by injecting liquidity through Repos, purchases of public and private securities in the secondary market, and credit channeling programs for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.

As for the Eurozone, COVID-19 is projected to cause an even greater contraction in this bloc of countries, from growth of 1.3% in 2019 to -10.2% by 2020, according to the IMF, affected by falling industrial production and disruptions in international trade. In response to this difficult outlook, the European Central Bank (ECB) keeps the short-term deposit rate (Overnight) at -0.50% per annum, while easing the terms of the private credit channelling programme through financial institutions and expanded the programme for the purchase of public and private securities on the secondary market.

On the other hand, the high uncertainty caused by the pandemic has led to an increase in volatility in capital flows and affected the growth prospects of emerging economies, leading to a widespread depreciation of their currencies against the US dollar. In particular, Latin America, already facing a weakened economic situation, has been affected by lower commodity prices and a global tourism flow, causing the IMF to project a regional contraction of -9.4% by 2020. In this context, central banks in the region continue to implement liquidity provision and credit channeling programmes to the private sector in a widespread manner.
 
In relation to raw materials, the price of Texas intermediate oil (WTI) is gradually rising, influenced by the production cut of the Organization of petroleum exporting countries (OPEC) and its allies. Thus, projections indicate that the average WTI price for 2020 would be around $35 a barrel, below the value of about US$60 per barrel initially expected in the National Budget. On the other hand, the price of gold remains above $1,700 per troy ounce, being used as a haven of value in a context of high uncertainty. Commodity price performance benefits the terms of trade for the Dominican Republic, which would partially offset, through the oil bill and gold exports, the negative impact the pandemic has had on the activities of the external sector due to the contraction of the world economy.

Importantly, at the time of coVID-19 containment measures in the Dominican Republic, the economy was in a favourable cyclical position, characterized by growth around potential and low inflationary pressures. These strong macroeconomic fundamentals have given the flexibility to take expansive monetary measures to accommodate the adverse shock. Indeed, preliminary information from the Monthly Economic Activity Index (IMAE) indicates that economic activity slowed significantly in March and April in relation to the pace of expansion observed in January and February, thus recording a cumulative average year-on-year variation of -7.5% in the first four months of 2020.

In this context, the Central Bank continues to implement a set of monetary and financial measures aimed at mitigating the effects of coronavirus through increased financing for productive sectors and households at lower interest rates. In particular, of the total RD$ 120 billion that have been made available to financial intermediation entities (equivalent to a monetary stimulus of about 3 percentage points of GDP), some RD$ 80 billion have been channeled through different facilities, with an RD$ 40 billion being made available to continue to support productive activity and contribute to a rapid recovery in domestic demand during the rest of the year.

As a result of monetary measures, there has been a significant reduction in interest rates on loans from multiple banks and greater dynamism in monetary aggregates. In addition, favourable monetary conditions have contributed to an acceleration of credit to the private sector in national currency that expands above 14.0% year-on-year, highlighting the channeling of loans to the Manufacturing, Hotels and Restaurants, Trade and Construction sectors.

On the other hand, the pandemic has significantly affected public finances, due to a drop in tax revenues due to economic slowdowns and tax relief facilities, as well as increased public spending associated with social programmes aimed at preserving employment and implementing sanitative measures. In this regard, the Central Government deficit is projected to increase from -2.2% of GDP in the original budget to -5.0% of GDP, according to the updated estimates contained in the budget amendment approved by the National Congress.

On the other hand, it should be emphasized that the measures to provide liquidity in foreign currency of some US$ 622 million and the interventions in the foreign exchange market that have taken place during this year have contributed to the lower currency flow associated with the paralysis of tourism, the reduction of remittances and the moderation of exports and foreign direct investment , in a context in which demand for dollars has increased markedly for precautionary reasons in the face of high uncertainty. In addition, it is emphasized that the high levels of International Reserves of the Central Bank will allow the institution to continue to support the foreign exchange market, in such a way that the foreign exchange needs of economic operators and the general public are met, helping to maintain the relative stability of the exchange rate in the face of a convulsive international environment.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this regard, the institution will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on the Dominican economy, being prepared to continue reacting in a timely manner to factors that could jeopardize the inflation target and affect macroeconomic stability.