The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of July 2012, decided, effective as of August 1, 2012, to reduce by 50 basis points its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (Overnight), of 6.00 % to 5.50% per year. At the same time, it decided to reduce the Lombard Tax Rate by 50 basis points, from 8.00% to 7.50% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference interest rate is based on the fact that the projections confirm that the inflation rate would continue below the lower limit of the goal of 5.50% ± 1.00% for this year 2012. Indeed, in In June, the interannual rate of inflation was 2.71% and the accumulated rate of January-June was 0.89%, while the interannual core inflation reached 3.36%. The forecast models do not foresee significant inflationary pressures in the monetary policy horizon.

In the external context, the United States economy reflects lower than expected growth. In the case of the Eurozone, whose economy remains in a recessive state, recent announcements by the European Central Bank have been received with reserved optimism and fiscal risks remain high. In emerging economies, economic activity also shows a slight deceleration. Faced with reduced inflationary pressures, central banks, both in advanced countries and in emerging economies, have been compelled to apply expansive monetary policies. International prices of primary goods are lower than in 2011, except for some basic foods that have been affected by the drought in the United States.

In the domestic sphere, the indicators of production and domestic demand show an evolution below their long-term trend or potential capacity. Credit to the private sector continues to exhibit slow growth while, given the low expectations of inflation, real interest rates have risen.

With the measure of reduction of interest rates of policy expected a reactivation of credit and domestic demand. Inflation and growth expectations remain aligned with the forecasts published in the recent Monetary Policy Report.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to direct monetary policy towards the achievement of the inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to react in a timely manner to risks regarding price stability and price stability. good functioning of the financial and payment systems.

