BCRD cuts its monetary policy rate to 4.75 percent per year

At its monetary policy meeting in July 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to reduce its monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points again, from 5.00% to 4.75% per year. According to the BCRD's short-term liquidity management scheme, the rate of paid deposits (overnight) decreases from 3.50% to 3.25% per year and the rate of permanent ease of expansion (repos) is reduced from 6.50% to 6.25% per year.

The benchmark decision is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. June's monthly inflation was -0.18%, so accumulated inflation in the first half of the year fell to 1.17%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from June 2018 to June 2019, stood at 0.92%, remaining for the eighth consecutive month below the lower bound of the target range. Similarly, underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, fell to 1.95% in June, while a downward revision in economic analysts' inflation expectations for the entire monetary policy horizon was observed. The different measurements would indicate the absence of inflationary pressures. The BCRD forecasting system notes that inflation would remain below the lower bound of the target range of 4.0% to 1.0% until the end of 2019, converging at the centre of the target by 2020.

Various uncertainty factors persist in the international environment, associated with geopolitical risks and trade disputes between larger economies. In this context, global economic activity has slowed and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised downward global growth projections to 3.2% in 2019 and 3.5% in 2020, while Consensus Forecasts estimates global growth of 2.7% in both 2019 and 2020.

The performance of developed countries remains led by the United States of America (USA), although there are signs of a slowdown in its economy, with year-on-year growth of 2.3% in the second quarter of the year. In this regard, Consensus estimates that the U.S. would grow 2.5% in 2019 and 1.9% by 2020. In this context of less dynamism and low inflationary pressures, the market expects the Fed to reduce its benchmark interest rate at its July meeting, while the Federal Reserve has indicated that it is prepared to implement expansive measures, if necessary to sustain economic growth and aggregate demand.

In addition, the growth outlook in the Euro Zone (EEH) is revised downwards, with expansions estimated at 1.1% in 2019 and 1.2% in 2020, in the face of slowing down its larger economies and uncertainty around the UK's exit process from the European Union (Brexit). Considering this picture and low inflation levels, the European Central Bank highlighted the need to maintain a highly accommodative monetary stance and announced that they are assessing for their next monetary policy meeting to reduce their benchmark interest rate, along with a set of additional expansive measures, with the aim of increasing liquidity, boosting credit and reversing the deterioration in economic conditions in this bloc.

On the other hand, growth projections continue to decline in Latin America, with a regional expansion of 0.9% in 2019 and 2.2% in 2020. This revision reflects lower forecasts for almost all Latin American countries, highlighting the two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, which would grow below 1.0% in 2019. In this less favourable outlook, the countries in the region that would see the largest expansion this year would be the Dominican Republic (5.5%), Panama (4.8%) Bolivia (4.0%), according to Consensus Forecasts.

In terms of raw materials, the average price of Texas intermediate oil (WTI) remained in July at around US$57 per barrel, influenced by geopolitical conflicts between some crude oil-producing countries, which have been offset by lower demand associated with the slowdown in the global economy. In this regard, the average price is expected to be maintained during 2019 at around US$60 a barrel, consistent with what is envisaged in the National Budget. On the other hand, the price of gold has increased significantly in recent months, ranking above US$1,400 a troy ounce, being used as a value haven in a high volatility environment.

In the domestic context, according to preliminary information from the Monthly Economic Activity Index (IMAE), the economy expanded by 4.7% in the first half of the year, reflecting a slowdown in aggregate demand in recent months, associated with the persistence of uncertainty factors in the pre-election process and a complex international environment, which have affected investment expectations. In a context of low inflationary pressures, the package of expansive measures, including cuts in the monetary policy rate and the channelling of resources outstanding from legal lace, amounting to more than RD$21 billion, will continue to contribute to the dynamization of private credit and boost economic growth around the levels provided for in the Monetary Programme between 5.0% - 5.5%.

On the other hand, the process of consolidation of public finances continues, with a primary surplus expected to be reached at the end of 2019, as stipulated in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities, such as foreign direct investment, remittances and, to some extent, tourism, would continue to contribute to relative exchange rate stability and facilitate the accumulation of international reserves.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this regard, the institution will continue to monitor the moderation of the world economy and uncertainty factors, as well as its potential impact on the performance of domestic demand, being prepared to continue to react in a timely manner to factors that may lead to deviations from the macroeconomic goals of the Monetary Programme. Santo Domingo, July 30, 2019

