At its monetary policy meeting in July 2013, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to maintain its monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 4.25% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged is based on the analysis of the risk balance on the inflation projections. In this way, forecast models and market expectations indicate that inflation would be within the target in the monetary policy horizon. The inter-annual inflation rate, June 2012-June 2013, stood at 4.80%, accumulating 1.76% in the first six months of the year and influenced by a monthly variation of 0.04%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation stood at 5.10%.

In the external context, faced with expectations of gradual de-escalation of the monetary stimulus by the Federal Reserve of the United States of America, international financial conditions have become more restrictive due to the reversal of capital flows, especially from emerging economies. In recent months, the US dollar has strengthened against most currencies worldwide. Particularly in Latin America, in the course of 2013, there have been depreciations of the exchange rate in countries such as Argentina (10.3%), Brazil (9.1%), Uruguay (9.1%), Peru (8.5%), Colombia (6.3%). ) and Chile (5.3%), higher than the one observed in the Dominican Republic of 3.9% so far this year.

On the other hand, the Euro Zone remains in recession projecting a fall of 0.6% for 2013 while the growth projections for Latin America are located at 3.0%, according to the Consensus Forecast, consistent with the downward revision in prospects of growth of emerging economies. The prices of raw materials in world markets show a mixed picture, manifested in reductions in food and metals, and increases in fuels.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand point to a moderate improvement for the second half of the year, influenced by the combination of monetary and fiscal stimulus measures. Credit to the private sector in national currency accelerated in July, growing at an annual rate of around 13.5%, influenced by the placement of more than RD $ 12 billion of the resources released from the reserve requirement, more than 60% of the approved amount, as well as for the flexibilization of current regulations for debtors minors. This trend of credit expansion, together with higher public investment spending, would continue to boost the dynamism of economic activity.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
