In its monetary policy meeting corresponding to the month of July 2014, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep the monetary policy interest rate unchanged at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as the performance of the rest of the main macroeconomic indicators and market expectations. In June, the interannual rate of inflation fell to 3.68%, remaining around the lower end of the target range for 2014 of 4.5% ± 1%. The accumulated inflation in the six months computed of the year is 1.56%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, was reduced to 3.32% at the end of June.

Externally, growth projections for the world economy have been adjusted downwards for 2014, due to a combination of US economic performance below expectations and a reduction in the growth prospects of emerging countries, in an environment affected by climatic and geopolitical risks. In that sense, according to the Consensus Forecast, the economy of the United States of America points to an expansion rate of around 1.6% in 2014, despite the fact that it reported a growth rate estimated at 4.0% for the second quarter of the year. In that order, the downward adjustment in the growth prospects in 2014 is seen by the markets as temporary, since for 2015 the US economy is expected to grow around 3.0%.
On the other hand, the Euro Zone continues the recovery process initiated last year. It is expected that by 2014 the economy of the Zone will increase by 1.1%, accelerating its growth to 1.6% by 2015. This trend of expansion observed in Europe significantly reduces the risks of deflation in the forecast horizon. In the case of Latin America, growth projections have been cut to 1.7% in 2014 and 2.6% in 2015, due to the influence of low growth exhibited by large economies such as Brazil and Mexico, while negative rates are expected in Venezuela and Argentina.

In the domestic sphere, the positive economic dynamic is maintained, pointing towards a projected growth rate consistent with the Macroeconomic Framework for the end of the year, of 4.5%. In the same way, credit to the private sector in national currency grows above 13.0% year-on-year, higher than the nominal product projection for the end of the year. This rate of expansion in private loans in national currency would remain in the second half of the year. On the other hand, fiscal policy is carried out in line with the provisions of the General State Budget Law, while the behavior of the external sector continues to show improvement with respect to what was expected. In this environment of fiscal prudence and a downward trend of the deficit in the current account of the balance of payments, supported by higher revenues from mining exports, the free zone sector and tourism, the relative stability of the exchange rate is maintained.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
