At its monetary policy meeting in July 2015, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate was made after examining the national macroeconomic panorama, mainly the balance of risks around the inflation projections and the expectations of the private sector, as well as the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. It was observed that the interannual rate of inflation in the month of June amounted to 0.62%. In cumulative terms, inflation stood at 0.60% at the end of that month. Likewise, core inflation, related to the monetary conditions of the economy, stood at 2.32% year-on-year in June. Forecasts continue to indicate that inflation would remain below the lower limit of the target established in the Monetary Program for 2015, converging to the center of the range of 4.0% ± 1.0% in the monetary policy horizon.

In the external environment, according to the Consensus Forecast, a year-on-year growth of the United States of America (USA) of 2.4% is expected for 2015 and 2.8% for 2016. Under this premise, it is expected that the US Federal Reserve will begin its normalization process monetary policy in the last quarter of the year and that inflation will gradually converge towards the goal by the end of 2016, after reaching the unemployment target of around 5.25%. In the case of the Euro Zone, the Consensus Forecast forecasts a product expansion of 1.5% for 2015 and 1.8% for 2016. Although there is still uncertainty regarding the outcome of the crisis situation in Greece, the effects on volatility in the markets of capital have tended to moderate. The projections for Latin America were revised downwards and suggest that the economy would not grow in 2015, increasing around 1.5% in 2016. However, this projection is highly influenced by the deteriorating situation of Venezuela's growth. If this country is excluded from the sample, Latin America would grow close to 0.7% in 2015 and 2.0% in 2016.

In terms of raw material prices, the correction in the stock markets of China, the second largest economy in the world, has been reflected in significant reductions accompanied by a tendency for the dollar to appreciate worldwide. In this context, conservative forecasts on the performance of the world economy in the medium term are maintained.

In the domestic sphere, internal production, demand and employment expand according to the expected trajectory. The cycle trend of the monthly indicator of economic activity (IMAE) at the end of May shows a year-on-year growth rate of around 6.1%, having revised the GDP growth of the first quarter of the year from 6.5% to 6.6%. Likewise, credit to the private sector in national currency grows at an annual rate of around 11.5% per month of July. On the fiscal policy side, public accounts continue to show a surplus as of May, indicating that by the end of this year a primary surplus would be created, in excess of the one established in the 2015 National Budget. The current level of public debt consolidated is around 46.0% of GDP, below the regional average. In the same way, the external accounts evolve favorably, projecting a current account deficit of the Balance of Payments around 2.0% of the GDP for the closing of the year. This trend would benefit the relative stability of the foreign exchange market, as well as the accumulation of international reserves that currently stand at around 3.4 months of imports.
The BCRD reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
