BCRD cuts its monetary policy rate to 4.50% per year

At its monetary policy meeting in August 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to reduce its monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points from 4.75% to 4.50% per annum. According to the BCRD's short-term liquidity management scheme, the rate of paid deposits (overnight) decreases from 3.25% to 3.00% per year and the rate of permanent ease of expansion (repos) is reduced from 6.25% to 6.00% per year.

The benchmark decision is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. July's monthly inflation was 0.47%, while cumulative inflation in the first seven months of the year stood at 1.64%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from July 2018 to July 2019, stood at 1.40%, remaining for the ninth consecutive month below the lower bound of the target range. In addition, underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, stood at 2.0% in July. Inflation expectations from economic analysts, as well as the BCRD's forecasting system, indicate that inflation would remain around the lower bound of the target range of 4.0% to 1.0% by the end of 2019, while no inflationary pressures are visible by 2020.

Uncertainty factors that have been gravitating in the international environment have been accentuated, particularly those related to commercial disputes, as well as geopolitical risks. In this context, Consensus Forecasts again reduces its estimate of global growth, placing it by 2.6% in both 2019 and 2020.

In terms of the performance of developed countries, the United States of America (USA) moderated its year-on-year growth to 2.3% in the second quarter of the year. Consensus estimates that the U.S. would reduce its expansion from 2.9% in 2018 to 2.3% in 2019 and 1.9% by 2020. In this context of lower dynamism and low inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve lowered its benchmark interest rate by 25 basis points at the last monetary policy meeting. Due to the persistence of uncertainty factors, market analysts expect the Fed to make further interest rate cuts for the rest of the year.

Meanwhile, the growth outlook in the Euro Zone (ZE) is low, rising at 1.1% for 2019 and 1.2% by 2020, affected by uncertainty surrounding the UK's exit process from the European Union (Brexit) and global trade disputes. Indeed, during the second quarter of the year the United Kingdom, Germany and Sweden reported negative growth. Considering this adverse outlook and low inflation levels, the European Central Bank has announced that it will implement a set of expansive monetary measures aimed at providing liquidity to the private sector and stimulating aggregate demand.

On the other hand, Latin America's growth projections continue to deteriorate, with a 2019 regional expansion of 0.6% according to the International Monetary Fund and 0.7% Consensus Forecasts. In particular, Consensus envisages lower forecasts for almost all Latin American countries, highlighting the two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, which would grow below 1.0% in 2019. In this context, the region's growth in 2019 would be led by the Dominican Republic (5.3%), Panama (4.6%) Bolivia (4.0%), according to Consensus Forecasts.

For raw materials, the average Price of Texas Intermediate Oil (WTI) remained around US$55 per barrel in August, mainly explained by the prospect of lower global demand. In this regard, the average price is expected to remain below US$60 a barrel during 2019, the level covered by the National Budget. On the other hand, the price of gold has increased significantly in recent months when it was used as a value shelter in an environment of high international uncertainty, exceeding the $1,500 Troy ounce, well above what is stipulated in the National Budget of US$1,262 an ounce.

In the domestic context, preliminary information from the Monthly Economic Activity Index (IMAE) indicates that economic growth has begun to recover, reaching 4.7% in the January-July period and, if this trend continues, would be around its potential by the end of the year. Domestic economic activity has been influenced by a complex international environment, as well as by the uncertainty characteristic of pre-election processes and their impact on expectations. However, expansionary monetary measures have begun to boost private credit, through the channeling of more than RD$17 billion of legal lace resources as financing to the productive sectors. In this regard, monetary policy interest rate cuts and the disbursement of resources outstanding from the legal loophole, amounting to almost RD$17.3 billion, are expected to boost domestic demand in the coming months, through increased investment and private consumption.

On the other hand, the process of consolidation of public finances is maintained, with a primary surplus expected to be reached at the end of 2019, as stipulated in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as foreign direct investment and remittances have performed well, compensating for the recent moderation of tourism, induced by lower global demand and by the negative media campaign in the face of isolated cases in the sector. In this challenging international environment, the Dominican Republic has maintained the relative stability of the exchange rate, presenting a cumulative depreciation in the year of 2.0%, lower than that observed in the same period of the previous year and among the lowest among Latin American countries and emerging economies, as a result of the strength of macroeconomic fundamentals and credibility in its economic policies.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this sense, the institution will continue to monitor the moderation of the world economy and factors of uncertainty both externally and internally and its impact on aggregate demand, being prepared to continue to react in a timely manner to factors that may lead to deviations from inflation targets and affect Dominican economic growth.

