At its monetary policy meeting in August 2013, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to increase its Monetary Policy Rate by 200 basis points, from 4.25% per annum to 6.25% per annum. At the same time, the interest rates of permanent expansion and monetary contraction facilities will increase to 7.75% and 4.75% annually, respectively.

The decision to raise the reference rate takes into account the balance of risks on inflation projections, particularly the potential transfer to domestic prices that could occur, as a result of the volatility experienced by the foreign exchange market in recent weeks. The inter-annual inflation rate, July 2012-July 2013, stood at 5.67%, accumulating 2.39% in the first seven months of the year, while the monthly variation reached 0.62%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation stood at 5.25%.
In the external context, given the lower expectations of global economic growth and the possible gradual dismantling of the monetary stimulus by the Federal Reserve of the United States of America, international financial conditions have become more restrictive. International capital flows are emerging from emerging economies, producing an almost generalized depreciation in the currencies of these countries. The Euro Zone continues in recession despite the fact that the latest growth data shows a possible turning point. In Latin America, Consensus Forecast growth projections were revised down in August, while capital outflows continue to weaken local currencies. International prices of raw materials, particularly oil, show an upward trend that has accelerated due to geopolitical risks.

In the domestic sphere, the growth of economic activity and domestic demand reached a turning point in the first quarter of the year. After the sharp slowdown in January-March, the economy grew 2.8% in the April-June period. Credit to the private sector in national currency accelerated its year-on-year growth rate to exceed 14.0% in August, as a result of the process of transmission of monetary policy towards economic activity. It is expected that the economy will continue presenting an upward trend in the coming months in a context of recovery of the confidence of the private sector and of an ordered behavior of public finances, in line with the Budget. It is expected that in the second half of the year the process of fiscal consolidation would continue, allowing the Government to reduce the public deficit to 1.1% of GDP for the year in January-June, below the deficit of 1.4% of GDP, consistent with the Budget.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
