At its August 2017 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.25% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate took into account the risk balance around the inflation projections, the evolution of the main national macroeconomic indicators, as well as the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy and market expectations. The monthly inflation rate amounted to 0.18% in the month of July, so the accumulated rate to the seventh month of the year stood at 1.20%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation stood at 2.54%, below the lower limit of the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0% of the Monetary Program. Additionally, core inflation rose to 2.23% year-on-year. The projections indicate that inflation would remain close to the lower limit of the target at the end of the year.

In the international context, the industrialized economies grew at similar rates during the second quarter of the year. The United States of America (USA) and the Euro Zone (ZE) registered an interannual expansion of the real product of 2.2%, while Japan grew 2.1% with respect to the same period of the previous year. According to the Consensus Forecast, the US would grow 2.1% in 2017 and 2.4% in 2018, while the product of the ZE would expand by 2.0% and 1.8% during those years. The dynamism of the advanced economies would have a positive impact on world economic activity, which would grow 3.0% in 2017 and 2018. It should be noted that the inflationary pressures of the developed economies remain low, projecting 2.0% for the US in both years. of inflation of 1.5% in 2017 and 1.3% in 2018 for the ZE.

In Latin America there is a gradual economic recovery, emerging from the recession in the current year 2017, with the exception of Venezuela. The projections indicate that the economy of the region would grow 1.6% in 2017 and 2.4% in 2018, driven by more favorable terms of trade.
International financial conditions for emerging economies show a high volume of liquidity, influenced by a more gradual monetary normalization process in the US. Likewise, the monetary policy stance of the Federal Reserve, together with greater dynamism in European economies, has contributed to a depreciation of the dollar in recent months. On the other hand, oil prices remain below the projected for the current year, while the price of gold has increased above US $ 1,300 per troy ounce. These trends in international markets favor the good performance of the external sector in the Dominican Republic.

In the domestic sphere, the Dominican economy grew 4.0% in interannual terms during the first semester of the year, influenced by a slowdown in domestic demand during the April-June period. However, in the labor market more than 76,000 new jobs were generated during that period, according to the Continuous National Labor Force Survey.

It is important to note that, as a result of the recent measures of monetary expansion, a greater dynamism is observed in credit oriented to consumption and production. In this sense, since the measures were taken, loans to businesses and households have increased by more than RD $ 10,400 million, almost three times the monthly average of the January-July period. In year-on-year terms, credit to the private sector in national currency expanded at a rate of 10.6%, above the nominal product growth. The impact of monetary measures on credit and real economic activity is projected to achieve a GDP growth of around 5.0% at the end of this year.
On the fiscal side, preliminary figures show that the non-financial public sector deficit at the end of July reached 1.3% of GDP. In year-on-year terms, public spending grows around 6.0%, while revenues collected by the Government show a double-digit year-on-year growth rate and remain above the budget projection. This behavior of public finances would contribute to achieving the deficit target of -2.3% of GDP at the end of the year, equivalent to a primary surplus of 0.8% of GDP.

With respect to external accounts, foreign exchange generating activities maintain a favorable performance, which would contribute to placing the current account deficit at around 2.0% of GDP by the end of the year. Additionally, the flow of foreign currency has allowed to increase international reserves, which facilitates the maintenance of relative stability in the foreign exchange market.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and maintain macroeconomic stability. In that sense, it will continue to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures against possible risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
