The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of August 2012, decided to reduce by 50 basis points its Monetary Policy Interest Rate (Overnight), from 5.50% to 5.00% per annum. At the same time, it decided to reduce the Lombard Tax Rate by 50 basis points, from 7.50% to 7.00% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference interest rate takes into account that the inflation projections remain below the target, both for this year and for 2013. In July, the interannual rate of inflation was reduced to 1.64 %, while core interannual inflation stood at 3.16%. The forecast models do not foresee significant inflationary pressures in the two-year monetary policy horizon.

In the external context, economic conditions remain similar to the previous month. According to the Economic Consensus, the United States would grow 2.2% in 2012, a slight improvement compared to the forecasts of the previous month, while the Euro Zone would experience a contraction of 0.5% this year, with sharp decreases in Greece (6.7%), Spain (1.7%) and Italy (2.1%). In Asia, the Chinese economy has shown signs of slowdown, reaching a growth of 7.6% in the second quarter. The forecasts for Latin America have also been revised downwards, with the region's growth estimated for 2012 at 2.9% as a result of a strong deceleration of its larger economies, with Brazil and Argentina standing out. International prices of primary goods remain relatively stable, although they are still above their historical averages.
In the domestic sphere, the indicators of production and domestic demand remain below their long-term trend. The Dominican economy grew 3.8% in the first half of the year and it is expected that in 2012 it would reach a growth of around 4.0%. As a result of the latest monetary policy decisions, the interest rates of the Financial System have been decreasing. This contributes to creating the conditions for a possible revitalization of credit to the private sector, which had reduced its annual growth rate in response to the expectations originated by the electoral cycle.

It should be noted that the process of revitalizing credit could be conditioned by expectations about future economic policy decisions and their impact on the decisions of consumption and investment of economic agents. However, the Central Bank estimates that the greater channeling of resources for productive activities as a consequence of the expansionary stance of monetary policy, would boost the economy in the short term, smoothing the effects of a possible process of fiscal consolidation.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to react timely to risks on price stability and good functioning of the financial and payment systems.
