The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its Monetary Policy Meeting of September 2012, decided to leave its Monetary Policy Interest Rate unchanged at 5.00% per annum. At the same time, it decided to keep its Lombard Rate unchanged at current levels of 7.00% per year.

The decision regarding the reference interest rate takes into account that the most recent projections place the inflation rate below the lower limit of the 2012 target, but within the tolerance range of the target of 5% ± 1% for 2013. In the month of August, the interannual rate of inflation rose to 2.16%, while the interannual core inflation stood at 3.50%. The forecast models do not foresee significant inflationary pressures in the monetary policy horizon.

In the external context, the recent measures of monetary easing in the United States and the announcement that its monetary policy rate would remain close to zero until 2015, has sent the signal of moderate growth with low inflationary pressures, which has been reflected in a depreciation of the dollar and in a moderation in oil prices. Likewise, capital flows to emerging economies are increasing, while prospects for recession in the Eurozone continue for the rest of the year and part of 2013.
In the domestic sphere, production and domestic demand continue below their long-term trend, while market interest rates begin to fall as a result of the measures adopted in recent months, as the transmission mechanism of the monetary politics. If this trend continues, an upturn in private credit and economic activity is expected, which, together with the reordering of public finances through a comprehensive fiscal reform within the framework of a new agreement with the IMF, would help to improve the conditions macroeconomic indicators for the coming quarters.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to react timely to risks on price stability and good functioning of the financial and payment systems.
