At its monetary policy meeting for the month of September 2014, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to maintain its monetary policy interest rate at 6.25% per annum.

The decision regarding the reference rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as the performance of the main macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. Last August, the year-on-year rate of inflation fell to 3.13%, below the lower end of the target range of 4.5% ± 1% for 2014. Accumulated inflation in the first eight months of the year is 2.33%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, an indicator that collects information on the movement of prices of monetary origin, was reduced to 3.26%.

In the external context, the growth of the United States of America (USA) was revised upwards to 4.6% during the second quarter of the year. The Federal Reserve Bank continues to implement its gradual policy of moderation of monetary stimulus, implemented during the international financial crisis. The latest forecasts of the Consensus Forecast suggest that the US would grow 2.1% in 2014 and 3.1% in 2015. This indicates that the recovery of the US economy would continue gradually, with no anticipated increases in interest rates until at least the middle of next year. In the case of the Eurozone, although the economy showed signs of weakening in its economic activity during the second quarter of the year, positive growth is expected around 0.9% for the end of 2014 and 1.4% for 2015, consolidating its process of Economic recovery. Regarding Latin America, the Consensus Forecast revised its economic growth projection to 1.4% for this year, as a result of signs of recession in some of the large economies such as Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela.
In the domestic sphere, the accumulated economic growth as of August amounted to 6.9%, according to the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE). For 2015, the macroeconomic framework contemplates a growth of 5.0%, around the potential product. Market interest rates remain below their historical average, while credit to the private sector in national currency expands at a year-on-year rate of 14.9%. On the fiscal policy side, budget execution points to a smaller deficit than expected in 2014, because revenues grow at an annual rate higher than that of public spending. The Government's strategy to reduce the fiscal deficit would continue in 2015, as a way to make public finances more sustainable. Regarding the external sector, a current account deficit of around 3.9% of GDP is projected for the current year. The moderation in the current account deficit has contributed to the fact that the depreciation of the exchange rate, so far this year, is only 2.4%. It is expected that next year the greater dynamism observed in the sectors that generate foreign exchange will continue, which would help maintain relative stability in the exchange market.

The Central Bank confirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target and affirms that, if necessary, it can assume a different policy stance as the world economy evolves and the domestic situation in the face of potential risks that affect stability. of prices, growth and good functioning of the financial and payment systems.