BCRD maintains its monetary policy rate at 4.50% per year
At its monetary policy meeting in September 2019, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 4.50% per annum.

The benchmark decision is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. August's monthly inflation was 0.47%, while cumulative inflation in the first eight months of the year stood at 1.99%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from August 2018 to August 2019, stood at 1.72%, remaining below the lower bound of the target range. In addition, underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, stood at 2.04% in August. Inflation expectations from economic analysts, as well as the BCRD's forecasting system, indicate that inflation would be at the end of 2019 around the lower bound of the target range of 4.0% to 1.0% and would remain close to the centre of the target range by 2020.

In the international environment, the uncertainty factors that have been gravitating this year persist, particularly those related to trade disputes between the United States of America and China, as well as geopolitical tensions in different parts of the world. In this context, the global economy is estimated to expand by 2.6% in 2019, while the 2020 growth projection is down to 2.5%, according to Consensus Forecasts.

The U.S. growth outlook stands at 2.3% for 2019 according to Consensus Forecasts, moderating to 1.8% by 2020. Taking into account the lower dynamism of economic activity and low inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve decreased in September, for the second consecutive time, its benchmark interest rate by 25 basis points, consistent with what is expected by market analysts. In addition, the Federal Reserve has been providing more liquidity to the financial system with the goal of reducing short-term interest rates.

As for the Eurozone, the growth outlook remains low, rising at 1.1% for both 2019 and 2020, affected by uncertainty surrounding the UK's exit process from the European Union (Brexit) and global trade disputes. Considering this adverse outlook and low inflation levels, the European Central Bank announced a package of expansive measures, highlighting the reduction in the interest rate of the permanent deposit facility (overnight), placing it at -0.50% per annum. It also announced a new round of purchases of sovereign debt assets in a monthly amount of $20 billion, as well as a liquidity provision program for the private sector credit pipeline through financial institutions.

On the other hand, Latin America's growth projections have deteriorated, projecting a regional expansion of 0.5% by 2019 according to Consensus Forecasts. The region's performance would be influenced by recessionary conditions in Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua, while the two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, would grow below 1.0%. This combination of lower growth and volatility in international markets has contributed to the sharps of the depreciations of almost all currencies in emerging economies, and in particular Latin America, in recent months.

In terms of raw materials, the average Price of Texas Intermediate Oil (WTI) remained around US$55 per barrel during the month of September, despite having higher volatility associated with geopolitical tensions in oil-producing countries. The average price is expected to remain for the remainder of 2019 below $60 a barrel, a level set out in the National Budget, as a result of weakening global demand. On the other hand, the average price of gold remained above $1,500 per troy ounce in September, as it was used as a haven of value in an environment of high uncertainty.
In the domestic context, preliminary information from the Monthly Economic Activity Index (IMAE) indicates that aggregate demand has begun to recover in response to the recent implementation of expansive monetary measures. Indeed, after cumulative growth of 4.7% during the first half of the year, the economy expanded by 4.6% year-on-year in July and accelerated to 4.8% year-on-year in August. If this positive trend continues over the coming months, economic growth is expected to hover around its 5.0% potential by the end of the year.

In particular, monetary easing measures implemented since June, through the reduction by 100 basis points of the monetary policy rate and the release of more than RD$34 billion of legal lace resources to the productive sectors, have boosted private credit, which expands year-on-year by around 11%. Monetary conditions will remain favourable over the coming months as monetary policy transmission mechanisms operate, boosting domestic demand through increased investment and private consumption.

On the other hand, the process of consolidation of public finances is maintained, with a primary surplus expected to be achieved at the end of 2019, as stipulated in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as foreign direct investment and remittances continue to perform well, compensating for recent tourism moderation, induced by lower global demand and the negative media campaign in the face of isolated cases in the sector. In this complex international environment, the Dominican Republic has maintained the relative stability of the exchange rate, presenting during this year a cumulative depreciation below the average of Latin American countries and emerging economies, as a result of the strength of macroeconomic fundamentals and credibility in its economic policies.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this sense, the institution will continue to monitor the moderation of the world economy and factors of uncertainty both externally and internally and its impact on aggregate demand, being prepared to continue to react in a timely manner to factors that may generate deviations from the inflation target and affect Dominican economic growth.


