At its monetary policy meeting in October 2015, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate was adopted after a complete analysis of the balance of risks around inflation projections, market expectations, the national macroeconomic outlook and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. It was observed that in September the year-on-year inflation rate stood at 0.39% and that, in cumulative terms, inflation reached 1.33% at the end of that month. On the other hand, core inflation, an indicator that reflects the monetary conditions of the economy, was 1.90% year-on-year in September. Forecasts indicate that inflation would approach the lower limit of the target established in the Monetary Program for the end of 2015, gradually converging towards the center of the range of 4.0% ± 1.0% in 2016.

In the external context, according to the Consensus Forecast, world production would grow 2.6% in 2015, accelerating to 3.0% in 2016, driven by the performance of developed economies, which have benefited from important monetary stimuli. According to forecasts made during the month of October by Consensus, the economy of the United States of America (USA) would grow 2.5% in 2015 and 2.7% in 2016, while the Euro Zone (ZE) would expand by 1.4% and 1.7% during those years, respectively. Inflation in the industrialized economies of Europe and the US would remain low, close to zero, during the current year. For 2016, the US Consumer Price Index would increase to 1.9%, close to its medium-term goal, while inflation in the ZE would be 1.2%. It should be noted that the labor market, both in the US and the ZE, shows reductions in unemployment. In the United States, the unemployment rate stood at 5.1% in September, a level considered to be full employment by the Federal Reserve. In the Euro Zone, the unemployment rate fell from 11.0% to 10.8% in the month of September.
In another order, the main economies of emerging markets continue to slow their growth and some of them, as is the case in Brazil, remain in recession. China registered a growth of 6.9% during the third quarter, well below the average of the last decade. According to the International Monetary Fund, China's economy would grow 6.8% this year and 6.3% next year. Taking into account this behavior of China and other large emerging economies, as well as the risks arising from the global economy, the US Federal Reserve left its benchmark rate unchanged at its most recent monetary policy meeting.

In the case of Latin America, a contraction of 0.7% is projected in 2015, recovering gradually in 2016 with a moderate growth of 0.5%. This year's Latin American performance is highly influenced by the estimated contraction of the economies of Brazil (-2.8%) and Venezuela (-7.8%), as well as by the projected low growth for Argentina (0.9%) and the slowdown in the growth of other important exporters of commodities, such as Chile (2.1%) and Peru (2.7%).

In international markets, the tendency to the appreciation of the dollar is maintained, while oil prices continue below the average of recent years. This behavior has contributed to low inflation in the United States and Europe, in contrast to what happened in the large countries of Latin America, exporters of raw materials, where exchange rate depreciation has generated higher inflation.
In the domestic sphere, economic activity in the Dominican Republic continues to show high dynamism in the short term. In that sense, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) presents a real growth rate of 6.7% in interannual terms in January-September. The growth was even greater in the July-September period, at 7.1%, according to preliminary figures. Consistent with this dynamic of growth, loans to the private sector in local currency grew at an annual rate of around 11.2% as of October, in line with the expansion of nominal GDP.

In the context of fiscal policy, budget execution points to the government continuing its process of fiscal consolidation, reaching a primary surplus in the current year. According to the Budget approved for 2016, consolidation would continue during that year with a primary surplus of around 0.7% of GDP. and a deficit for the year equivalent to 2.3% of GDP. With regard to the external sector, the macroeconomic fundamentals are consolidated with a current account balance that would close the year with its lowest deficit in the last decade, due to lower oil prices and the better performance of income from tourism, remittances and exports of free zones. These positive results in the fiscal and external accounts, would facilitate the accumulation of reserves and the relative stability of the exchange market.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
