At its monetary policy meeting in October 2018, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged is based on a detailed analysis of the balance of risks around inflation forecasts, including quantitative and qualitative information from the relevant international environment, national macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and projections. medium term of that set of variables.

Cumulative inflation as of September stood at 1.52%, while year-on-year inflation, from September 2017 to September 2018, fell for the third consecutive month, going from 3.87% in August to 3.29% in September, staying within the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0% established in the Monetary Program.

Core inflation, linked to monetary conditions, fell to 2.53% year-on-year in September. The forecast system indicates that, on average, inflation would remain within the target range in the two-year monetary policy horizon. In the external context, the relevant economic outlook for the Dominican economy is influenced by the normalization of monetary policy in the United States of America (USA), the appreciation of the dollar in international markets and the gradual increase in oil prices. Other factors such as the increase in volatility in international capital markets, global trade tensions and the increase in uncertainty in some emerging economies also contribute to what is perceived as a changing international scenario.
In this context, according to Consensus Forecast, the world economy would grow 3.2% in 2018 and 3.1% in 2019, driven by the continued dynamism of the US economy that would expand 2.9% and 2.6%, respectively, during those years. Given the growth of the US in the context of full employment and inflation above the programmed target, it is expected that the process of increases in the benchmark interest rate of the Federal Reserve Bank will continue. It should be noted that the normalization process of monetary policy has been accompanied by an expansive fiscal policy that has increased the public deficit in that country, which is estimated to be around 4.0% of GDP by 2018. On the other hand, the economy of the community of countries that make up the Euro Zone (ZE) would grow 2.0% in 2018 and 1.8% in 2019. Given that inflationary pressures remain moderate in these countries, the monetary policy stance of the European Central Bank would remain expansive in the medium term, which would help to increase the interest rate differential with the US, promoting a greater appreciation of the dollar.

The economic situation for emerging markets shows a greater degree of uncertainty, with a slowdown observed in some economies with weak macroeconomic fundamentals. However, there are emerging economies that show significant dynamism, such as the cases of India and China whose economies would expand during 2018 by 7.3% and 6.6%, respectively. In the case of Latin America, the growth projections of countries such as Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina and Nicaragua have been corrected downwards. On the other hand, the growth prospects of other economies in the region with solid foundations such as Chile, Peru, Colombia and the Dominican Republic have been revised upwards. Domestically, economic activity continues to grow above its potential. In effect, the real Gross Domestic Product expanded by 6.9% during the first nine months of 2018, driven by a year-on-year growth of 7.3% in the third quarter. According to the Central Bank's forecasting system, economic activity would continue to grow above its potential in the current year, closing 2018 with growth of around 6.5%. Consistent with this trend, credit to the private sector in national currency continues to expand close to 12% year-on-year to the month of October, while monetary aggregates present growth rates consistent with the estimated expansion of nominal GDP.
On the fiscal policy side, the evolution of public finances over the course of the year suggests that the Central Government would close in December near the deficit target set in the 2018 Budget. As of September, the growth rate of the income is of two digits, at the same time as the public expenditure expands moderately. In the external sector, the foreign exchange generating activities maintain a remarkable dynamism, foreseeing that the Current Account deficit is located slightly above -1.0% of GDP at the end of the year, associated with higher oil prices. The good performance of the external sector has facilitated the accumulation of international reserves, which remain at levels above US $ 7,000 million, which contributes to the relative stability of the foreign exchange market.

The consolidation process of public finances and the low current account deficits, in a context of high economic growth and controlled inflation, are a reflection of our strong macroeconomic fundamentals. In effect, the country risk perception indicator for the Dominican Republic calculated by the JP Morgan firm (EMBI) is at the end of October about 100 basis points below the risk indicator for Latin America, being This is the level of risk relative to the lowest region in history, which reflects the confidence of investors in the Dominican economy based on the strength of its fundamentals. The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve the inflation target and to maintain macroeconomic stability, as well as to ensure the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems. In this sense, the monetary institution remains attentive to the evolution of the monetary policy normalization of the United States and its impact on the interest rate differential with the Dominican Republic, as well as the price of oil and the dynamics of the dollar in the international market, and is ready to react in a timely manner to any factor that jeopardizes compliance with its inflation target.
