The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its Monetary Policy Meeting in October 2012, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Interest Rate unchanged at 5.00% per annum. In addition, he decided to leave his Lombard Rate unchanged at 7.00% per annum.

The decision regarding the benchmark interest rate is based on the fact that the most recent projections keep the inflation rate below the lower limit of the 2012 target and within the target of 5% ± 1% for 2013 In the month of September, the interannual inflation rate rose to 2.60%, while the core interannual inflation was 3.53%. The forecast models suggest that in the monetary policy horizon, inflation would remain within the range established in the Monetary Program, while market expectations remain anchored around the target in the medium term.

In the external context, the latest projections of the IMF World Economic Outlook confirm the slow recovery of advanced countries while revealing the process of slowdown experienced by emerging economies. Financial tensions in the countries of the Eurozone have moderated, but the recession persists while uncertainty remains about its final correction. The announcement of a third round of quantitative easing in the United States would help to improve the economic conditions of that country in the short term while the dollar would tend to depreciate.
In the domestic sphere, domestic demand and production continue to evolve in positive terrain, although below its potential. During the period January-September, economic activity expanded 3.9% in real terms. In the financial market, interest rates continue to decline, as the transmission mechanism of monetary policy operates and a moderate recovery in private credit begins to be observed.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to react timely to risks on price stability and good functioning of the financial and payment systems.
