At its monetary policy meeting for the month of October 2014, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep the monetary policy interest rate unchanged at 6.25% per annum, in line with the neutral position it has maintained in recent months.

The decision on the benchmark interest rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as the performance of the rest of the main macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. Last September, cumulative inflation in the nine months computed stood at 2.53%, while the interannual rate of inflation fell to 2.83%, below the lower end of the target range of 4.5% ± 1% for 2014 In the same way, the interannual core inflation, which is related to monetary conditions, fell from 3.26% in August to 3.07% in September. It is important to note that inflation in recent months has been influenced by low inflationary pressures of external origin, and it is expected that it will be within the target range in the policy horizon.

In the external context, the most recent data maintain the positive economic outlook for the United States of America. The Federal Reserve concluded its policy of monetary stimulus by buying financial assets, indicating that it would keep the monetary policy interest rate unchanged for extended time, between 0% and 0.25% until mid-2015, while consolidating the recovery of that economy and continues to improve labor market conditions.
In the case of the Eurozone, economic activity remains moderate, projecting an expansion in 2014 and 2015 of 0.8% and 1.2%, respectively, with the risk of a deflation scenario. For Latin America, a lower economic dynamism is projected, with a GDP growth of 1.2% expected in 2014 to reach 2.2% in 2015 due to signs of recession in countries such as Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela, and moderate performance in other important economies of the region. .

In the domestic sphere, economic activity maintained a positive growth trend, expanding by 7.0% during the January-September period, with a growth rate of over 6.0% for the whole year of 2014. As a reflection of this dynamism, credit to The private sector in domestic currency is expanding at an interannual rate of more than 15.0% and would converge at rates close to 12.0% at the end of the year, in line with nominal GDP growth. On the fiscal policy side, budget execution points to a smaller deficit than expected in 2014 (2.8%), because revenues grow at an annual rate higher than that of public spending.

Tourism and remittances reflect a better than expected performance, which, together with the drop registered in the prices of oil and other raw materials, would contribute to the improvement in external accounts, projecting that the current account deficit closed at 3.9% of the GDP in 2014. The IMF forecasts that the trend in the price of oil will continue to moderate for 2015, with which it is estimated that there would be a reduction of some US $ 600 million in the Dominican oil bill. Due to this effect, a significant reduction in the current account deficit is projected at levels between 2.9% and 3.1% of GDP by the end of 2015, a situation that will favor the relative stability of the exchange rate as important foreign currency savings take place. At the same time, it would allow the Central Bank to continue strengthening its levels of international reserves.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
