At its November 2018 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged is based on a detailed analysis of the balance of risks around inflation forecasts, including information from international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. Accumulated inflation as of October stood at 1.75%, while year-on-year inflation, from October 2017 to October 2018, reached 3.52%, remaining within the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0% established in the Monetary Program.

On the other hand, core inflation, linked to monetary conditions, recorded a year-on-year change of 2.60% in October. The forecast system indicates that inflation would close below the lower limit of the target range in the current year, gradually converging to the midpoint of that range of 4.0% ± 1.0% in the two-year monetary policy horizon.

In the external environment, the relevant economic outlook for the Dominican economy remains conditioned by the normalization of monetary policy in the United States of America (USA), the appreciation of the dollar in international markets and the increase in uncertainty in some emerging economies . On the other hand, during the last month, there has been a significant reduction in international oil prices associated with a moderation in geopolitical tensions among oil producing countries and the outlook for lower demand associated with the risk of a slowdown in world economy .
In this context, according to Consensus Forecast, the world economy would grow 3.2% in 2018 and 3.0% in 2019, driven by the US economy that would expand 2.9% and 2.7%, respectively, during those years. Given the dynamism shown by the US economy, the normalization process is expected to continue with an additional increase in the benchmark interest rate this year. On the other hand, the Euro Zone (ZE) is projected to grow 2.0% in 2018 and 1.7% in 2019, noting that the growth prospects of some of its main economies, such as Germany, Italy and Spain, have been revised downwards. Given that inflationary pressures remain moderate in these countries, the monetary policy stance of the European Central Bank would remain expansive in the medium term, which would contribute to increasing the interest rate differential with the US, contributing to maintain the appreciation of the dollar.

Regarding emerging markets, a certain degree of uncertainty persists, with a slowdown observed in some economies with weak macroeconomic fundamentals. However, there are emerging economies that show significant dynamism, such as the cases of India and China whose economies would expand during 2018 by 7.3% and 6.6%, respectively. In the case of Latin America, the region is projected to grow 1.4% in 2018 and 2.0% in 2019, driven by the dynamism of economies in the region with solid foundations such as Chile, Peru, Colombia and the Dominican Republic. However, the growth projections of countries with economic vulnerabilities and socio-political tensions such as Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua continue to be corrected downwards.

Domestically, economic activity continues to grow above its potential, in a context of price stability. In effect, the real gross domestic product (GDP) expanded by 6.9% during the first nine months of 2018, driven mainly by investment and private consumption. According to the forecast system of the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, economic activity would continue to be dynamic, closing the year 2018 with a growth of around 6.5%. On a consistent basis, monetary conditions remain favorable, characterized by an expansion of credit to the private sector in local currency close to 12% year-on-year at the end of November, while the growth rates of monetary aggregates are approaching the expansion of nominal GDP.

On the fiscal policy side, the moderation in public spending continues to be maintained at 5% year-on-year in October, while the expansion in revenues exceeds 12% year-on-year, contributing to the process of consolidating finances public. In the foreign sector, foreign exchange generating activities, such as tourism, remittances and exports, maintain a remarkable dynamism, with the current account deficit being slightly above 1.0% of GDP at the end of the year, associated with the highest oil prices. The good performance of the external sector has facilitated the accumulation of international reserves, allowing reserve coverage levels that exceed 4 months of imports and contributing to the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The proper management of monetary and fiscal policies have contributed to keeping inflation expectations of private agents anchored around the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0%, while the country risk indicator of the Dominican Republic (EMBI) , for its acronym in English) remains significantly below the average risk perception for Latin America. In a changing international environment, the strength of the macroeconomic fundamentals of the Dominican Republic, accompanied by high economic growth and low inflation, give economic policies a greater capacity to react to any external shock that could put macroeconomic stability at risk.

In this sense, the monetary institution remains attentive to the evolution of the monetary policy normalization of the United States, as well as the dynamics of the dollar and the price of oil in the international market, being prepared to react in a timely manner to any factor that puts at risk the fulfillment of its inflation goal. The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.