The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, at its monetary policy meeting for the month of November 2014, decided to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) unchanged at 6.25% per annum, in line with the neutral policy stance maintained since last rate review fifteen months ago.

The decision on the benchmark interest rate took into account the balance of risks around the inflation projections, as well as the performance of the main macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. Last October, accumulated inflation stood at 2.44%, while the year-on-year inflation rate rose to 2.88%, below the lower end of the target range of 4.5% ± 1% for 2014. Likewise, inflation The interannual core, which is related to monetary conditions, was reduced to 3.11%. It should be noted that the recent evolution of inflation has been influenced by the fall in prices of external origin, particularly in oil. It is expected that inflation will be within the target range in the policy horizon.

In the external context, the most recent data confirm the favorable economic conditions of the United States of America (USA), our main trading partner. Indeed, the most recent information on US growth shows an expansion of 3.9% in the third quarter of the year, better than expected by the market. According to the Consensus Forecast, the EUA would grow 2.2% in the current year, expecting an even greater expansion by 2015, around 3.0%. Despite this dynamism, the market expects the Federal Reserve of the United States (FED) to maintain the monetary policy interest rate unchanged, between 0% and 0.25% until mid-2015. This policy position is consistent with the recovery of the labor market, which registered an unemployment rate of 5.8% in October, showing a trend towards what the FED considers its potential unemployment rate at around 5.25%.

On the other hand, economic activity in the Eurozone remains moderate, projecting an expansion of 0.8% in 2014 and 1.1% in 2015, according to Consensus Forecast. Latin America has been affected by the decline in commodity prices in international markets, slowing growth in some of the largest economies, particularly in Brazil, Venezuela and Argentina. Consensus Forecast projects an economic expansion in this region that is lower than in recent years, with GDP growth expected of 1.0% in 2014 and 1.8% in 2015.
In the domestic sphere, economic activity maintained a positive growth trend as it expanded 7.2% during the January-September period, with a growth rate of more than 6.5% expected for the whole of 2014. As a reflection of this dynamism, credit to The private sector in national currency is expanding satisfactorily and is expected to close the year with a growth rate close to 14.0% year-on-year. The macroeconomic accounts show a significant improvement, with projections of current account deficit of 3.9% of GDP for 2014 and in the range 2.9% -3.1% of GDP for 2015, a situation that will favor the relative stability of the exchange rate, at the same time that would allow the Central Bank to continue strengthening its levels of international reserves. Likewise, the fiscal deficit for this year would be around 2.8% of GDP, while the 2015 Budget contemplates a deficit of 2.4% of GDP, product of a primary surplus of 0.5% of GDP, which would help to improve the sustainability of the debt.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
