The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of November 2012, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Interest Rate unchanged at 5.00% per annum. At the same time, he decided to leave his Lombard Rate unchanged at 7.00% per annum.

In October, the year-on-year inflation rate rose to 2.82%, while core interannual inflation fell to 3.31%. It is expected that by the end of 2012 it will be below the lower limit of the goal. However, the decision to leave the benchmark interest rate unchanged is based on the fact that the most recent projections indicate that inflation in 2013 would be within the target of 5% ± 1 percentage point and market expectations are consistent with these predictions. In the monetary policy horizon, the forecast models show that inflation would remain within the target.

In the external context, the situation of the Euro Zone has deteriorated, while the United States (USA) shows a higher growth rate in the third quarter of the year, higher than expected by the market. The risks related to the fiscal situation in the European Union and in the United States have increased, generating uncertainty at an international level. Some Latin American countries, such as Argentina and Brazil, show signs of weakening in their growth rate. The prices of primary goods tend to moderate, while the US dollar has experienced some appreciation.

In the domestic sphere, although production and domestic demand are evolving below their potential, credit to the private sector in national currency begins to recover, which should lead to a greater dynamism of economic activity and to gradually close the product gap , in an orderly public finance environment.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to react in a timely manner to eventual risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
