At its monetary policy meeting in October 2013, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic decided to keep the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) unchanged at 6.25% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate takes into account inflation projections and market expectations. The interannual inflation rate, corresponding to the period September 2012-September 2013, stood at 5.13%, while cumulative inflation to the ninth month of 2013 amounted to 3.57%. In monthly terms, September inflation was 0.49%, while core inflation, the indicator of price performance that best reflects the monetary policy stance, recorded a year-on-year rate of 4.83%.

In the external context, the growth outlook for the world economy, according to the IMF, has moderated during the current year (2.9%). For 2014, a better performance is expected (3.6%), as a result of a significant improvement in the advanced economies. The forecast of growth of the IMF for the United States of America (EUA) is 1.6% for 2013 and 2.6% for 2014. On the other hand, it is expected that the economy of the Eurozone will contract this year by 0.4%, recovering in 2014 with an expansion of around 1%. In Latin America, projections point to regional growth of 2.7% in 2013 and 3.1% in 2014.
Recently, the Federal Reserve Bank (FED) decided to maintain its TPM between 0% and 0.25% and continue with its program of purchase of financial assets for US $ 85 billion per month. This decision reduced the long-term international interest rates, helped to soften the trend towards the appreciation of the dollar and improved the expectations of the emerging economies that had been affected by the outflow of capital due to the uncertainty of a possible reversal of monetary policy. of the FED. The temporary fiscal agreement, after the closure of the US government, also helped to reduce pressures on international financial conditions that were quite restrictive. The international prices of raw materials are reduced below their value for the last two quarters.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand show an important improvement over the performance shown at the beginning of the year. The Gross Domestic Product grew by 5.5% in the third quarter, for an accumulated 2.9% in January-September, which indicates that by the end of the year it would be meeting the 3.0% projection of the Monetary Program. Product growth during the first nine months of the year is consistent with an expansion of credit to the private sector in national currency of around 15% per annum in the month of September. It is expected that in the last quarter of the year, the relative stability of the exchange rate will be maintained, given the entry of important flows from sovereign bonds, pending disbursements from multilateral organizations, tourists and absent Dominicans who visit us at Christmas and the contributions of Barrick Gold.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to take the necessary measures against risks on price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
