
At its November 2016 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to maintain its monetary policy rate (MPR) at 5.5% per year.

Although the conditions that led to a preventive increase of the MPR at the last meeting are maintained, such as the expected increase in the monetary policy interest rate of the Federal Reserve, the gradual increase in oil prices and the expectations generated around it. to the electoral process of the United States, the BCRD chose to keep its reference rate unchanged. This decision was taken while waiting for more information about the economic impact that could be generated by extreme climatic events that occurred recently.

The decision regarding the reference rate weighs the balance of risks on the inflation projections based on the analysis of the main internal macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. In October, the year-on-year inflation rate decreased to 0.91%, while cumulative inflation to the tenth month of 2016 was 0.65%. Likewise, the interannual core inflation, related to monetary conditions, remained at 1.78 percent.
In the external context, contrary to expectations, the markets' reaction has tended to increase the stock market indicators after the recent elections in the United States of America (USA). At the same time, the dollar has strengthened and long-term interest rates have increased due to a higher probability of a rate increase by the Federal Reserve Bank. In this context, Consensus Forecast estimates that the US economy would grow 1.5% in 2016 and 2.2% in 2017. On the other hand, the Euro Zone (ZE) would expand around 1.6% in 2016, supported by the performance of Germany ( 1.8%) and Spain (3.1%), mainly. For 2017, this region would experience a moderate slowdown, growing 1.3% year-on-year, influenced by the impact of Brexit and the uncertainty in France and Italy, countries that face short-term electoral processes.

In Latin America (AL), the indicators of most of the capital markets in the region have shown a downward trend in recent weeks. In the real sector, the LA economy is still in recession. According to Consensus Forecast, the region would contract by -0.4% in the current year due to important recessions in countries such as: Venezuela (-10.3%); Brazil (-3.3%); Ecuador (-2.0%); and Argentina (-2.0%). Contrary to the prospects of these export economies of primary goods, Central America and the Dominican Republic, countries that have benefited from the low prices of commodities, particularly oil, experience positive growth rates with low levels of inflation. For 2017, Latin America would grow around 2.1%, with Venezuela (-3.2%) the only economy that would remain in recession.

In the domestic sphere, economic activity and domestic demand evolve favorably in the short term, growing above its potential level. The economy is expected to grow in the range of 6.0% -6.5%, the highest growth in the region, even considering the possible negative effects of the recent floods on the results of the fourth quarter. Credit to the private sector in national currency continues to expand at a rate close to 12.0% in November and would close the year with an expansion greater than the estimated nominal product.
With regard to fiscal policy, the growth rate of public spending has slowed significantly in the second half of the year, which implies a more restrictive fiscal stance and in line with the projection of a deficit of 2.7% of GDP, presented in the latest revision of the Budget for the current year. It is expected that reconstruction efforts in areas of the country affected by the recent floods will have a moderate impact on the fiscal deficit without generating a significant deviation from the estimate of the deficit by the end of the year. In the external sector, a current account deficit is expected around -1.7% of GDP for the current year. This context of solid macroeconomic fundamentals contributes to maintaining favorable conditions to accumulate international reserves and promote the relative stability of the exchange market.

The BCRD reaffirms its commitment to continue conducting monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target and maintaining macroeconomic stability, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the measures necessary for risks regarding price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
