BCRD maintains its monetary policy rate at 4.50% per year
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. At its November 2019 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 4.50% per annum.

The benchmark decision is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. October's monthly inflation was 0.67%, while cumulative inflation in the first ten months of the year stood at 3.06%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from October 2018 to October 2019, stood at 2.48%, remaining below the lower bound of the target range. Underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, stood at 2.23% in October. For their part, both the inflation expectations of economic analysts and the BCRD forecasting system, indicate that inflation would be closer to the center of the target range of 4.0% to 1.0% at the end of 2019 and would remain around the core value of the target by 2020.

In the international environment, although the pockets of uncertainty that have been gravitating this year persist, some progress has been made in the negotiation process between the United States of America (USA) and China in the last month, which could lead to a potential trade agreement in the coming months. In this context, Consensus Forecasts maintains its moderate growth projection for the global economy of 2.5% in 2019, while the IMF forecasts a global expansion of 3.0% for this year.

Economic activity in the U.S. has gradually slowed, projecting growth to move from 2.9% in 2018 to 2.3% in 2019 and 1.8% by 2020, according to Consensus. In the face of weakening the economy and low inflation, the Fed has reduced its benchmark rate three times, accumulating a 75 basis point decline in the year. In addition, the Fed has been providing greater liquidity to the financial system through repurchase agreements (REPOS) and purchases of Treasury bills on the secondary market, with the goal of reducing short-term interest rates. Going forward, market analysts do not expect additional adjustments to the federal funds rate until at least mid-2020s.

As for the Euro Zone, the growth outlook remains low, rising at 1.1% and 1.0% for 2019 and 2020, respectively, conditioned by global trade disputes and uncertainty surrounding the UK's exit process from the European Union (Brexit). Considering the weak growth and lack of inflationary pressures, the European Central Bank continues to implement the recently announced package of expansionary measures, which include the liquidity provision programme for the private sector credit channeling and the purchase of sovereign bonds on the secondary market.

On the other hand, in Latin America (AL) uncertainty has been heightened as a result of socio-political conflicts that have arisen in different Latin American countries, further deteriorating the regional growth outlook to 0.4%, according to Consensus and 0.2% according to the IMF. The region's weak economic performance is conditioned by negative growth rates this year in countries such as Venezuela, Argentina, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Mexico, as well as by Brazil's modest expansion and the negative impact of social demonstrations in countries such as Chile, Bolivia and Colombia.

For raw materials, the average price of Texas intermediate oil (WTI) was around US$57 per barrel during the month of November, remaining below US$60 a barrel, a level as set out in the National Budget. On the other hand, the price of gold has remained at high levels, averaging US$1,475 per troy ounce in November, being used as a haven of value. This performance of oil and gold prices contributes to the continued favourable terms of trade of the Dominican Republic and benefit the external sector of the economy.

In the domestic context, preliminary information from the Monthly Economic Activity Index (IMAE) indicates that domestic demand continues to react favourably following the implementation of monetary easing measures. Indeed, the economy expanded by 5.2% year-on-year in October, having reached 5.1% in September. Thus, the average growth over the January-October period was 4.8%. The dynamism of economic activity in recent months would help economic growth be around its potential of 5.0% by the end of the year.

In particular, the expansionary monetary measures implemented since June, through the reduction by 100 basis points of the monetary policy rate and the release of more than RD$34 billion of legal lace resources to the productive sectors, have boosted private credit, which has increased by 11% so far this year and around 12% in the last twelve months. Monetary conditions will remain favourable over the coming months as monetary policy transmission mechanisms operate, boosting domestic demand through increased investment and private consumption.

On the other hand, the process of consolidation of public finances is maintained, with a primary surplus expected to be achieved at the end of 2019, as stipulated in the National Budget. In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as foreign direct investment and remittances continue to perform well, compensating for the recent moderation of tourism, which is expected to recover in the coming months. In this complex international environment, the Dominican Republic has maintained relative exchange rate stability, recording a cumulative depreciation of below the average of AL countries and emerging economies this year as a result of the strength of macroeconomic fundamentals and credibility in its economic policies.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this sense, the institution will continue to monitor the moderation of the world economy and factors of uncertainty both externally and internally and its impact on aggregate demand, being prepared to continue to react in a timely manner to factors that may generate deviations from the inflation target and affect Dominican economic growth.

