At its monetary policy meeting in November 2015, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.00% per annum.

The decision on the benchmark rate was preceded by a broad analysis of the macroeconomic outlook, including the risk balance around inflation projections, market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. It was observed that in the month of October, the interannual rate of inflation amounted to 1.23% and that, in cumulative terms, inflation reached 2.08% until that month. Additionally, core inflation, which reflects the monetary conditions of the economy, remained at 1.91% year-on-year. Inflation would end around the lower limit of the target established in the Monetary Program for 2015, gradually converging towards the center of the range of 4.0% ± 1.0% in 2016.

In the external context, according to Consensus Forecast, the world economy would grow 2.6% in 2015, accelerating to 2.9% in 2016, driven by the performance of developed countries. The United States of America (USA) would experience an expansion rate of around 2.4% in 2015 and 2.6% in 2016, while the Euro Zone (ZE) would expand by 1.5% and 1.7% during those years, respectively. Inflation in the industrialized economies of Europe and the US would remain close to zero during 2015. By 2016, it would increase by around 1.7% in the US and 1.1% in the EZ, in an environment of lower unemployment.

On the other hand, the outlook for the main emerging economies continues to fall, with the recession in Brazil and the slowdown in the rest of the net exporter economies of primary goods in Latin America, projecting a contraction of -0.8% in 2015 and recovering gradually in 2016, with a moderate growth of 0.2%. The Latin American economic panorama in 2015 is influenced by the estimated contraction of the economies of Brazil (-3.0%) and Venezuela (-8.0%), as well as by the projected low growth for Argentina (1.0%) and the deceleration of the growth of others important exporters of commodities, such as Chile (2.1%) and Peru (2.8%).

For its part, China's economy would grow 6.8% this year and 6.3% next year, below the average of the last decade, according to projections from the International Monetary Fund. In the international exchange markets, the tendency to the appreciation of the US dollar continues, while the prices of primary goods, particularly oil and gold, continue below the average of recent years.
Domestically, economic activity evolves favorably in the short term. The recent IMF mission that evaluated national economic conditions reaffirmed that the Dominican Republic continues to be among the most dynamic economies in the region. In that sense, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) projected for 2015 contemplates a real growth rate in the range 6.5% -7.0%. Consistent with the evolution of nominal GDP, loans to the private sector in national currency grew at an interannual rate of around 11.0% as of November.

Regarding the external sector, the current account balance would end the year with the lowest deficit in the last ten years, around 2.0% of GDP, due to lower oil prices and the good performance of revenues from tourism, remittances and exports of free zones. With regard to fiscal policy, the projection of the primary surplus in the current year is maintained, while for 2016, a primary surplus of around 0.7% of GDP is contemplated. These positive results in the external and fiscal accounts would facilitate the accumulation of reserves and the relative stability of the exchange market.

The Central Bank confirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against possible risks to stability of prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
