BCRD maintains its monetary policy rate at 4.50% per year
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. At its December 2019 monetary policy meeting, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 4.50% per annum.

The benchmark decision is based on detailed risk balance analysis for inflation forecasts, including international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. November's monthly inflation was 0.37%, while cumulative inflation stood at 3.45%. On the other hand, year-on-year inflation, i.e. from November 2018 to November 2019, stood at 3.23%, returning to the target range of 4.0% to 1.0%. Underlying inflation, reflecting monetary conditions, stood at 2.20% in November. For their part, both the inflation expectations of economic analysts and the BCRD forecasting system indicate that inflation would close 2019 below the target's core value and remain around 4.0% by 2020.

In the international environment, economic uncertainty has moderated slightly in recent months as the first phase of a trade agreement between the United States of America (USA) and China has been achieved, while there is greater clarity about the UK's exit from the European Union (Brexit). In that context, Consensus Forecasts, which brings together leading analyst firms that make international projections, maintains the forecast of moderate growth for the global economy of 2.5% for both 2019 and 2020, while the International Monetary Fund foresees an overall expansion of 3.0% for 2019 and 3.4% by 2020, according to the latest publication of the Economic Outlook in October.

Economic activity in the U.S. has gradually slowed, projecting growth to move from 2.9% in 2018 to 2.3% in 2019 and 1.8% by 2020, according to Consensus. In the face of weakening the economy and low inflation, the Fed has reduced its benchmark rate three times, accumulating a 75 basis point decline in the year. In addition, the Fed has been providing greater liquidity to the financial system through repurchase agreements (REPOS) and purchases of Treasury bills on the secondary market, with the goal of reducing short-term interest rates. Moving forward, the Fed and market analysts do not anticipate additional adjustments to the federal funding rate during 2020.

As for the Euro Area, the growth outlook remains low, rising at 1.2% and 1.0% for 2019 and 2020, respectively, conditioned by the weak performance of the industrial sector and the slowdown in international trade. Considering the absence of inflationary pressures, the European Central Bank continues to implement a package of expansive measures including the liquidity provision programme for the private sector credit channeling and the purchase of sovereign debt securities on the secondary market.

On the other hand, in Latin America, the deterioration of economic activity has been accentuated as a result of socio-political conflicts that have arisen in several of the countries of the region. Thus, growth prospects for Latin America remain low, with an expansion of 0.4% in 2019 and 1.4% in 2020. The region's economic slowdown is influenced by negative growth rates this year in Venezuela, Nicaragua, Argentina, Ecuador, Paraguay and Mexico, as well as the modest expansion of Brazil and the negative impact of social demonstrations in countries such as Chile, Bolivia and Colombia.

In terms of raw materials, global demand moderation contributed to the average price of Texas Intermediate Oil (WTI) being around US$57 per barrel during 2019, below the level set out in the $60 national budget per barrel. On the other hand, the price of gold has remained at high levels, averaging about $1,400 per troy ounce during 2019, being used as a haven of value in an environment of high uncertainty. This behaviour of oil and gold prices favors the Dominican Republic's terms of trade and benefits the external sector of the economy.

In the domestic context, the expansionary monetary measures implemented since June, through the cumulative reduction of 100 basis points in the monetary policy rate and the release of more than RD$34 billion of legal lace resources to the productive sectors, have contributed to the increase of private credit in national currency so far in the year. The dynamism of private credit in national currency is reflected in an expansion of more than 12% in year-on-year terms.

Favourable monetary conditions have boosted domestic demand through increased consumption and private investment. Economic activity has recovered by expanding year-on-year by 5.1% in September and 5.2% in October. In this context of dynamism in aggregate demand, economic growth is expected to be around its potential of 5.0% by the end of 2019 and during 2020.

In the domestic context, the expansionary monetary measures implemented since June, through the cumulative reduction of 100 basis points in the monetary policy rate and the release of more than RD$34 billion of legal lace resources to the productive sectors, have contributed to the increase of private credit in national currency so far in the year. The dynamism of private credit in national currency is reflected in an expansion of more than 12% in year-on-year terms.

Favourable monetary conditions have boosted domestic demand through increased consumption and private investment. Economic activity has recovered by expanding year-on-year by 5.1% in September and 5.2% in October. In this context of dynamism in aggregate demand, economic growth is expected to be around its potential of 5.0% by the end of 2019 and during 2020.

In the external sector, foreign exchange-generating activities such as foreign direct investment and remittances continue to perform well, compensating for the recent moderation of tourism, which is expected to recover in the coming months. In this complex international environment, the Dominican Republic has managed to strengthen its macroeconomic fundamentals, maintaining relative exchange rate stability and continuing the process of accumulation of International Reserves, which would end in 2019 at around US$8.5 billion, its highest historical level by year-end.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to drive monetary policy towards achieving its inflation target and the smooth functioning of financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. In this sense, the institution will continue to monitor the moderation of the world economy and factors of uncertainty both externally and internally and its impact on aggregate demand, being prepared to continue to react in a timely manner to factors that may generate deviations from the inflation target and affect Dominican economic growth.

