At its monetary policy meeting of December 2018, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate at 5.50% per annum.

The decision to leave the reference rate unchanged is based on a detailed analysis of the balance of risks around inflation forecasts, including information from international and domestic macroeconomic indicators, market expectations and medium-term projections. The monthly inflation for November was -0.35%, so the accumulated inflation during the first eleven months of the year was 1.39% and it is estimated with preliminary information in December that inflation would close the year at 1.3%. The forecast system indicates that inflation would gradually converge to the target range of 4.0% ± 1.0% during the next year.

In the international environment, forecasts remain that the world economy would grow 3.2% during 2018 and moderate to 3.0% in 2019, according to Consensus Forecast. The global expansion of economic activity would continue to be driven by the United States of America (USA), which would grow 2.9% in 2018 and 2.6% in 2019. Given the continuing dynamism of the US economy and the conditions of full employment in the labor market , the Federal Reserve (FED) increased its benchmark interest rate by 25 basic points at its December meeting to a range of 2.25% - 2.50%. However, the FED said that by 2019 it expects a process of normalization of the monetary policy more gradual than initially expected, associated with lower inflationary prospects for next year.

On the other hand, Consensus continues to downgrade the growth prospects of the Euro Zone (ZE) for both 2018 and 2019, estimating expansions of 1.9% and 1.7%, respectively. This moderation in the ZE is influenced by the slowdown in some of its main economies, such as Germany, Italy and France. Given that the inflation forecasts for this group of countries remain below their target, the monetary policy stance of the European Central Bank would remain expansive in the medium term, which would contribute to increasing the interest rate differential with the US and to the strengthening of the US dollar in international markets.
In the case of Latin America, the region is projected to grow moderately by 1.4% during 2018 and 1.9% in 2019, driven by the dynamism of economies such as the Dominican Republic, Bolivia, Panama, Paraguay, Chile and Peru. However, the growth projections of countries with economic vulnerabilities and socio-political tensions such as Venezuela, Argentina and Nicaragua continue to be corrected downwards.

As for raw materials, there has been a significant reduction in the price of oil in recent months, leading to West Texas Intermediation (WTI) crude at levels close to US $ 45 per barrel. . This fall in the price of oil is associated with both supply and demand factors, especially the increase in oil production in economies that are not part of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and the prospects for a moderation in global growth. However, according to the International Energy Agency, the reduction in the price of oil would be transitory, averaging in 2019 around US $ 55 per barrel.

Domestically, economic activity continues to grow above its potential, in a context of absence of inflationary pressures. In effect, according to preliminary estimates, the real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) would expand by 7.0% during 2018, driven mainly by investment and private consumption. Consistent with the economic dynamism, there is an expansion of credit to the private sector in national currency close to 11.0% year-on-year and a year-on-year growth of 11.2% in bills and coins issued, known as high-power money.

It is important to note that the weighted average passive interest rate of the multiple banks has increased by around 200 basis points after the increase of the Monetary Policy Rate of July 2018. This adjustment has allowed to close the interest rate differential with respect to to the US rates, helping to avoid any significant change in the investment portfolio in domestic and foreign currency that could put macroeconomic stability at risk.
On the fiscal policy side, the moderation of public sector expenditures with year-on-year growth of 5.2% was maintained as of November, while the expansion of revenues reached 13.2% year-on-year, contributing to the consolidation process of Public finances In the external sector, foreign exchange generating activities, such as tourism, remittances and exports, maintain a remarkable dynamism, with the current account deficit expected to be around 1.4% of GDP at the end of the year, associated with the higher oil prices. The good performance of the external sector has facilitated the accumulation of international reserves that exceed US $ 7,100 million, equivalent to a reserve coverage over the 4 months of imports and contributing to the relative stability of the exchange rate.

The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic is attentive to the evolution of the normalization of the monetary policy of the United States, as well as the dynamics of the dollar and the price of oil in the international market, being prepared to react in a timely manner to any factor that can generate inflationary deviations. In this sense, the issuing entity reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems, thus contributing to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability.