At its monetary policy meeting for the month of December 2016, the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD) decided to keep its monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.50% per annum.

The decision on the reference rate was preceded by an exhaustive analysis of the national economic panorama, of the international environment relevant to the Dominican economy, and of market expectations regarding the main macroeconomic variables. Additionally, the balance of risks around the inflation projections was evaluated in order to prevent any deviation in the BCRD target. The latest data on inflation indicates that the interannual rate stood at 0.88% as of November, while the accumulated inflation rate reached 0.79% in the first eleven months of the year. Core interannual inflation, which reflects the monetary conditions of the economy, stood at 1.79 percent. By the end of the year, inflation would end well below the lower limit of the goal of 4.0% ± 1.0%, contemplated in the Monetary Program.

In the external context, according to Consensus Forecast, the world economy would grow 2.5% in 2016, expecting an expansion of 2.8% for 2017 thanks to improvements in the growth projections of the United States of America (USA) and some emerging economies. In the case of the US, this year's growth would close around 1.6%, accelerating next year to 2.3%. On the other hand, real production in the Euro Zone (ZE) would grow 1.6% in 2016 and 1.4% in 2017. Inflation in these industrialized economies would remain positive, gradually approaching their respective targets. In that sense, inflation rates of 1.3% are expected for the US and 0.2% for the ZE in 2016. For next year 2017, inflation would rise to 2.4% in the US and 1.3% in the ZE. It should be noted that in the industrialized economies, labor market improvements would continue, with the US remaining in full employment and reaching a one-digit unemployment rate for the first time since the beginning of the 2007 financial crisis.
The perspectives of the emerging economies for 2017 indicate improvements in some of the larger economies such as Brazil and Russia. Both economies would be coming out of the recessions that affected them in 2016. China, on the other hand, would grow 6.6% in 2016 and 6.2% in 2017 according to the IMF, while India would have growth rates above 7.0% during these years. According to Consensus Forecast, Latin America would register a fall (-0.5%) in 2016, mainly due to significant contractions in economies such as Argentina (-2.3%), Brazil (-3.4%), Ecuador (-2.0%) and Venezuela (-10.7). %). There was also a slowdown in the growth of some commodity exporters such as Chile (1.6%), Colombia (2.0%) and Mexico (2.0%). For 2017, a recovery of growth in the region that would grow 1.8% is projected, driven by a better performance in Argentina (2.9%), Brazil (0.8%), Chile (2.1%), Colombia (2.5%) and Peru (4.2 %).

In the domestic sphere, economic activity evolves favorably in the short term. According to preliminary figures, the Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (IMAE) would have grown around 6.4% in the January-November period, which would be the highest growth in Latin America for the third consecutive year. Credit to the private sector in national currency has expanded to around 12.0% to date, a rate consistent with the evolution of the Nominal Gross Domestic Product so far this year. With regard to fiscal policy, the rate of growth of public spending has slowed markedly in the second half of the year, indicating a more moderate fiscal policy, despite the reconstruction efforts in the areas of the country affected by the recent floods. 
This fiscal effort, together with a current account deficit that would close the year between 1.7% and 1.9% of GDP, indicates that the Dominican economy remains healthy, exhibiting solid macroeconomic fundamentals, which creates favorable conditions for accumulating international reserves and promoting relative stability of the exchange market.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to continue conducting monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target and maintaining macroeconomic stability, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to adopt the necessary measures in the face of risks regarding price stability and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.