The Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, in its Monetary Policy Meeting of December 2012, decided to keep its Monetary Policy Interest Rate unchanged at 5.00% per annum. The Lombard Rate remains at 7.00% per annum.

In the month of November, the interannual rate of inflation was 3.37% and it is expected that by the end of 2012 it would be around 4.0%, below the lower limit of the Monetary Program target. The decision on the benchmark interest rate takes into account that inflation in 2013 would be within the target of 5% ± 1%, according to the BCRD forecast models. Market expectations remain in line with the BCRD's inflation projection, while no significant deviations are discernible with respect to inflation in the monetary policy horizon, even considering the impact of the tax reform on domestic prices.

In the external context, the risks related to the fiscal situation of the industrialized countries remain high. The fiscal and debt crisis of the Euro Zone would cause the economy to remain in recession during 2013, with a fall in GDP of around 0.1%, according to analysts of the Economic Consensus. In the United States of America (USA), the inability to find a solution so far to the problem of the fiscal cliff (Fiscal Cliff, for its acronym in English) could generate new taxes and spending cuts of almost US $ 600 billion, affecting significantly the economic activity and with its sequel in the rest of the economies, especially in those that trade more closely with said nation. However, it is expected that some kind of agreement will soon be reached to solve this problem.
For 2013, US growth would be 1.9%, a reduction from the 2.2% expected for 2012. Given this situation of moderate growth, the Federal Reserve has announced that it would maintain an expansive monetary policy for the next three years, which means maintaining low interest rates until 2015. For emerging economies, growth prospects show positive signs in an environment where large changes in the prices of primary goods are not expected. Given this international scenario, the monetary policy of the BCRD would maintain a prudent stance as long as inflation remains in line with the objective and there are no significant deviations from the fiscal targets established in the 2013 Budget.

In the domestic sphere, the Gross Domestic Product projects a growth of around 4% by the end of 2012, still remaining below its potential capacity. For the year 2013, the macroeconomic framework contemplates a growth of 3.0% that could adjust positively if the behavior exhibited by private credit in the last five months is maintained. Indeed, after having contracted during all the months of the first semester of the year, starting in July, the credit in national currency of all financial institutions has grown by more than RD $ 30,000 million, in response to lower interest rates. If this behavior continues in 2013, there could be greater growth in private consumption and investment, with its consequent impact on domestic demand.
The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to conduct monetary policy to achieve its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation in order to react timely to risks on price stability and good functioning of the financial and payment systems.