At its monetary policy meeting in December 2014, the Central Bank maintained its monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 6.25% per annum, a neutral stance that contributed to higher growth without generating monetary inflationary pressures.

The decision on the benchmark interest rate was taken after an exhaustive analysis of the risk balance around the projections of inflation, growth and other macroeconomic indicators, as well as market expectations and the relevant international environment for the Dominican economy. Last November, accumulated inflation reached 2.30%, while the interannual rate stood at 2.68%, below the lower end of the target range of 4.5% ± 1% for 2014. On the other hand, core inflation , related to the monetary conditions of the economy, was 3.14%. It is important to note that inflation continues to show a downward trend, driven by the continuous decline in the prices of primary goods in foreign markets, particularly oil. However, the forecasts indicate that inflation would return to the central point of the goal in the policy horizon.
In the international environment, the world economy would grow 2.6% in 2014 and 3.0% in 2015, according to the Consensus Forecast, driven largely by the United States of America (USA), whose growth in the third quarter of the year was revised upwards from 3.9% to 5.0%. Consumption and private investment continue to be the main determinants of the dynamism shown by the US economy, so it is expected that the expansion process in our main trading partner will continue to have a positive impact on Dominican growth. The US unemployment rate stood at 5.8% in December and the Federal Reserve (FED) expects it to be reduced to 5.25% by the end of next year, thus reaching its full employment level. Given this panorama, the FED would keep its monetary policy interest rate unchanged until the second half of 2015. Regarding the Eurozone (ZE), the growth of the third quarter was 0.8%, led by Greece (1.7%), Spain (1.6%), Germany (1.2%) and Portugal (1.1%). According to Consensus Forecast, for 2014 and 2015, growth in the ZE of 0.8% and 1.1%, respectively, would be expected. For Latin America (AL), Consensus Forecast projects a growth of only 0.9% this year, with a recession in Venezuela and Argentina, while Brazil grows around zero. The fall in LA is explained by the end of the so-called "Super Cycle of Commodities" that benefited the largest economies in the region.
In the domestic sphere, economic activity would end the year with a growth of around 7.0%, keeping close to its potential during 2015. The credit to the private sector in national currency that this year would register growth above 15%, would decrease gradually in 2015 to the range 10% -12%, rate around the growth of the nominal product expected for the coming year. In the external sector, the current account of the Balance of Payments would register a deficit of 3.5% of GDP in the current year, continuing its downward correction throughout 2015 to between 2.3% and 2.5% of GDP for the closing of the year. year. The favorable evolution of the external sector has contributed to maintaining stability in the foreign exchange market, closing the year with a year-on-year depreciation of around 3.5%. Additionally, it has facilitated the accumulation of gross international reserves (RIB), which will close the current year with a coverage of 3.1 months of imports. By 2015, the RIBs could exceed US $ 5,000 million, increasing import coverage to 3.2 months. The 2015 Budget contemplates a fiscal deficit of 2.4% of GDP, which is another indication of the solid foundations maintained by the Dominican economy.

The Central Bank reaffirms its commitment to implement monetary policy aimed at achieving its inflation target, while continuing to monitor the evolution of the world economy and the domestic situation, in order to take the necessary measures against risks to the stability of the economy. prices and the proper functioning of the financial and payment systems.
